Thursday Volume 589
4 December 2014 No. 74
HOUSE OF COMMONS
OFFICIAL REPORT
PARLIAMENTARY
DEBATES
(HANSARD)
Thursday 4 December 2014
£5·00
© Parliamentary Copyright House of Commons 2014
This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament licence,
which is published at www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright/.House of Commons
Thursday 4 December 2014
The House met at half-past Nine o’clock
PRAYERS
[MRSPEAKER in the Chair ]
Oral Answers to Questions
TRANSPORT
The Secretary of State was asked—
Tag Systems
1.Michael Fabricant (Lichfield) (Con): If he will take
steps to encourage operators of toll roads, bridges andtunnels to recognise each other’s tag systems.
[906428]
The Minister of State, Department for Transport (Mr John
Hayes): We have made life easier in several ways for
people who pay to use crossings: cashless, free flowcharging at Dartford; credit card payments at the Severncrossings; and the new Mersey gateway bridge willbenefit from cashless tolling. The idea that the five tagsystems work together is an interesting one, but I havenot received representations from those who representhauliers and others.
Michael Fabricant: Well, I shall make representations
now. Some 40,000 people have M6 tag cards, but thesecannot be used on any other crossing, and that seemsmadness to me. There was an attempt some years ago toget Transport for London and others to allow roamingof these tag cards, so will the Minister play a proactivepart in trying to ensure that we have commonalityamong tag systems?
Mr Hayes: “Proactive” is my second name. My hon.
Friend always brings originality to this Chamber andthis is an interesting and original idea, which I would bemore than happy to discuss with him. As I say, I havenot received formal representations, but his representationsare enough for me and I am more than happy to meethim.
Mr John Spellar (Warley) (Lab): In the changes
the Minister was just extolling, he only touched on therecent ones at the Dartford river crossing. How doeshe justify raising the charge by 25% and the whacking£105 fine if someone forgets? How much are those finesestimated to raise during the next year? How much willthe scheme cost to administer and, by the way, howwill he ensure that foreign drivers pay the charge?
Mr Hayes: Unusually, the right hon. Gentleman is
being rather critical and negative, and it is not in hischaracter to be so. The changes we are making atDartford are important and forward-looking and they
are succeeding. He is right about ensuring that all whoneed to pay do pay, and the progress report I can givethe House today is that the changes introduced just afew days ago are on schedule, on time and in tune withthe wishes of local people, who will get discounts, ashe will know. By paying in advance, people will alsopay less.
Mr Speaker: I am bound to say that I always regard
the right hon. Gentleman as an English classicist, andto my mind the pronunciation “skedule”is an Americanismthat I would not expect of him.
Stephen Metcalfe (South Basildon and East Thurrock)
(Con): Following the welcome introduction of free flowtolling and the Dart charge, a number of my constituentshave experienced problems accessing the residents’discountand transferring from the old system to the new. Willmy right hon. Friend update the House on whetherthese are isolated incidents or whether there is a systemicproblem?
Mr Hayes: I take your advice particularly seriously,
Mr Speaker, as you know, but I did not want anyone tothink that modernity was a foreign place for me, so Iwas adopting a little Americanism.
My hon. Friend is right to highlight the interests of
his constituents, as he always does so forcefully. Asthese questions need to have a real and direct purpose, Ishall set up a special line for my hon. Friend so he canfeed into the system any concerns his constituents have.It will be a conduit by which he can articulate theirneeds and worries so that we can get this absolutelyright.
Congestion
3.Mr Robin Walker (Worcester) (Con): What plans
he has to relieve congestion on roads.
[906430]
The Minister of State, Department for Transport (Mr John
Hayes): The Government have an ambitious strategy
for tackling congestion and improving the performanceof our roads. Our road investment strategy sets outplans to invest no less than £15 billion to enhancestrategic roads between 2015 and 2021. The investmentplan includes upgrading the M5 from Droitwich toWorcester South, expanding junction 6, improving capacityat junctions 5 and 7, and upgrading the section betweenjunction 4a and junction 6 to smart motorway. Theseimprovements will support growth in housing and jobsin South Worcestershire, address safety issues at thejunctions and lead to improved journey times and reliability.
Mr Walker: Like motorists in the north and east of
Worcester, I am delighted to see the investment injunction 6 of the M5, which will de-bottleneck trafficand unlock a huge amount of growth in our city.However, the southern link is a huge concern to motoristsin the south and west of Worcester. May I urge theMinister to engage closely with me, my neighbouringMPs and Worcester county council on the case forfull dualling of the southern link, including theCarrington bridge?405 406
4 DECEMBER 2014Mr Hayes: Barely a night goes by when I do not
dream about the Powick roundabout and the Carringtonbridge, as my hon. Friend knows, and I shall certainlycontinue the dialogue that he described. I think it wouldbe useful to have a meeting with him and other localpeople, including county councillors, to decide whatcan be done in this local scheme. It would, of course, bea matter for local discretion, but none the less, if we canplay a part in helping, we will.
Mr Clive Betts (Sheffield South East) (Lab): The
other week, my hon. Friend the Member for Penistoneand Stocksbridge (Angela Smith) and I drove the Under-Secretary of State for Transport, the hon. Member forScarborough and Whitby (Mr Goodwill), across thePennines from Sheffield towards Manchester. I did notthink he could understand how bad the Woodhead passwas, and why people willingly drove over it, until wetook him back over the Snake pass. A few crawler laneson the Woodhead might be a short-term sticking-plaster,but in the end it is a tunnel under the Pennines—afterall, they are only 2,000 feet high—that is the reallong-term answer. When is the review of such a projectlikely to start, who is likely to conduct it, and when,realistically, could work actually start if the go-ahead isgiven?
Mr Hayes: The hon. Gentleman is right to highlight
the issues around the Snake pass. I know there aresafety concerns there, and I have obviously used theroad myself. He knows that this Government have attheir very heart the idea of a northern powerhouse. Weare championing the interests of the north of England,perhaps to a greater degree than any previous Government.To that end, I shall look at all the specific questions thatthe hon. Gentleman asks on timing, on detail and onplanning, and I shall be more than happy to addressthem directly with him.
Sir Alan Haselhurst (Saffron Walden) (Con): Will my
right hon. Friend direct his attention to junction 8 onthe M11, the second name of which might be “Congestion”?Is he aware that the decision to site the motorwayservices area at the junction that is the main entrance toStansted airport has been the cause of that and is now,apparently, being seen as a block to any plans for thehousing that is needed in the area?
Mr Hayes: This is not the first time that my right hon.
Friend has raised this matter. Indeed, since I became aTransport Minister, I have spent a good deal of my lifeanswering his perfectly proper and assiduous inquiriesand representations on behalf of his constituents ontransport-related affairs. He is right that there is ahistory of congestion in that area, and I would be morethan happy to look at it and take his advice andguidance on the matter.
Richard Burden (Birmingham, Northfield) (Lab): Back
in September, the Public Accounts Committee describedthe Government’s approach to local road maintenance,which, as we know, is a major cause of congestion, as“ludicrous”. Now, despite the rather bashful claims thatthe Minister has made today about Monday’s roadannouncement, I have not actually heard members ofthe PAC queuing up to say that they have changed theirmind. Does that not tell him something?Mr Hayes: While I focus—understandably, I hope—on
the major changes that we are making as a result of thisunprecedented road investment strategy, this extraordinarilybold and long-term vision, the hon. Gentleman is rightthat local roads matter too. That is why we are spendingjust short of £1 billion a year, and why we have plannedto resurface 80% of the roads in the whole country. Allroads, in the end, are local, aren’t they, and local roadswill not be neglected under this Administration.
East Coast Main Line
4.Chi Onwurah (Newcastle upon Tyne Central) (Lab):
What assessment he has made of the recentperformance of east coast main line services.
[906431]
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr Patrick
McLoughlin): My officials meet East Coast and Directly
Operated Railways on a regular basis to discuss theperformance of the franchise. DOR’s financial accountsare published on its website on an annual basis.
Chi Onwurah: When the Secretary of State announced
the reckless and ideologically driven privatisation ofthis beloved and excellently performing public sectorservice, he made a commitment on the frequency ofservices from Newcastle, but not their cost, so will hetell me now whether prices will go down or be frozen, orwill they go up for the profits of Stagecoach and at theexpense of my constituents?
Mr McLoughlin: As I announced last week on a very
successful bid as far as Virgin-Stagecoach were concerned,they will reduce the costs on some of the most expensivetickets on that route. I would also point out that theVirgin-Stagecoach bid includes £140 million of investment,including £21 million on presentation and performanceenhancements to the current fleet; £20 million onenhancements to the new intercity express programmefleet; and a £4 million fund for customer stakeholderimprovement, among many, many more enhancements.If there was any party that reflected dogma last week, itwas the Labour party.
Martin Vickers (Cleethorpes) (Con): My constituents
will welcome the improved performance on the eastcoast main line, but in order to access services on themain line, they have to travel on the TransPenninenetwork. Does my right hon. Friend have any informationabout future services on that line?
Mr McLoughlin: My hon. Friend, along with the
Grimsby and Scunthorpe Telegraph , has led an interesting
campaign. I am pleased to say that after considerationof the responses to our consultation on the Northernand TransPennine Express franchise, we have decidedto retain the Cleethorpes services within the TPE franchise.The forthcoming invitation to tender for the TPE franchisewill specify that direct services between Cleethorpesand Manchester airport should continue. I know thatmy hon. Friends the Members for Cleethorpes (MartinVickers) and for Brigg and Goole (Andrew Percy) haveboth been at the forefront of this campaign, and I amvery pleased to announce today that it has been successful.
Michael Dugher (Barnsley East) (Lab): Polling shows
that a majority of the public oppose the Government’splans to privatise the east coast main line, and people intheir thousands are signing the petition launched byLabour this week. Given that the east coast service has407 408
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral Answersachieved the top customer satisfaction rating for a
long-distance rail operator and improved performance,and given that the public sector operator will havereturned over £1 billion to the Exchequer beforeprivatisation, why is Directly Operated Railways noteven allowed to bid for the contract? When will theSecretary of State finally listen to the travelling publicand call a halt to this privatisation?
Mr McLoughlin: I welcomed the hon. Gentleman to
the Dispatch Box last week when I answered his urgentquestion, but as this is his first Transport questions, Iagain welcome him to his post. I have to tell him howinterested I was in the interview that he gave to theDaily Mirror on Tuesday, in which he said:
“I want to be a Transport Secretary not a train-spotte r...
there have been too many train-spotters in the job.”
Anybody in this job is not a train-spotter but is interested
in what happens to the motorist, the passenger and thecyclist, and should not distinguish between them.
I come back to the point that I made last week. The
tendering process has given great rewards to thoseareas, and will bring more services and better facilitiesto passengers on that route. I followed the route thatthe Labour Government followed for 13 years. Whenthe last Labour Transport Secretary brought in DOR,he said that it would be a short-term solution.
Julian Sturdy (Y ork Outer) (Con): I welcome the
franchise announcements, which see major improvementsacross the network. In respect of the east coast mainline, however, there are some local concerns in Y orkabout the future franchise headquarters. For generationsY ork has been the beating heart of the east coast mainline, so will the Secretary of State or the Ministerresponsible for rail, the Under-Secretary of State forTransport, my hon. Friend the Member for Devizes(Claire Perry), agree to look at what can be done toensure that the headquarters stay in Y ork?
Mr McLoughlin: I understand the point that my hon.
Friend makes. The lease is up on the premises where theheadquarters are currently located. I want the newfranchise company to consider where its headquarterswill be, but one of the announcements was that therewould be training facilities in London, Derby and Y orkto train people to operate that service. Y ork will alwaysbe a very important part of the service.
Network Rail (Control Period 5 Investment)
5.Andrew Jones (Harrogate and Knaresborough)
(Con): What assessment he has made of Network Rail’splanned control period 5 investment.
[906432]
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr Patrick
McLoughlin): Between 2014 and 2019 Network Rail
will spend over £38 billion on running and expandingthe British rail network. The Office of Rail Regulation’srecent assessment of Network Rail’s performance againstthe control period 5 delivery targets is that the companyhas not made the progress expected in some areas. TheORR has asked Network Rail to provide plans todemonstrate how it will bring about improvementsand will hold the company to account for its delivery,as will I.Andrew Jones: I thank the Minister for that interesting
reply. The current CP5 plan includes electrification ofthe Leeds-Manchester TransPennine services, which is agreat benefit to many of my constituents, but how willwe get the benefits of electrification to more people, toput right the historical lack of progress that saw just9 miles electrified in 13 years under the previousGovernment?
Mr McLoughlin: My hon. Friend serves on the wider
taskforce that I set up to look into electrification in thenorth. I believe the taskforce is meeting today and Iawait its report. It is looking at 72 routes, some of whichare freight routes. My hon. Friend rightly points to themassive expansion in rail electrification that will takeplace over the CP 5 period, which is widely welcomedacross the rail industry and across the House.
Mrs Louise Ellman (Liverpool, Riverside) (Lab/Co-op):
One North brings together local authorities right acrossthe north to look at transport needs—road and rail.Does the current structure allow such integrated thinkingto go ahead, whether in the current control period orthe next, so that we can plan for people’s transportneeds looking at road and rail together?
Mr McLoughlin: I completely agree with the hon.
Lady about the prospects for looking across the piece atnot only rail but roads, which is indeed one of the thingsthat One North is looking at. I hope that we shall haveits interim report by the end of March. It looks not onlyat what we have set out in relation to HS3, but at otherinterconnectivities between the northern powerhouse.
Mr Philip Hollobone (Kettering) (Con): The next
time my right hon. Friend is on the fast train to hisDerbyshire constituency and sails through Ketteringstation without stopping, would he be kind enough toreflect on the fact that, with improved line speeds andelectrification to the Midland main line, it might bepossible to reinstate a half-hourly service northwardfrom Kettering, which was lost under the previousGovernment?
Mr McLoughlin: I am very interested in the points my
hon. Friend makes, one of which relates to the wholequestion of capacity on the railways. That is one of theprincipal reasons for developing HS2. He is right thatultimately that will allow more opportunities to providemore local services, as well as the services he wants forhis constituents.
Lilian Greenwood (Nottingham South) (Lab): Listening
to the Chancellor yesterday, you might have thoughtthat he had announced major new investment for therailways, but as we all know, the devil is in the detail. Hetold the north that he would replace the ancient andunpopular Pacer carriages with modern trains, but thegreen book says that bidders would only be “encouraged”to buy new trains. Yet another study for the south-westwas announced, shunting the issue further down theline. He also promised to put the “great” back into theGreat Eastern main line, but not a penny of new investmentwas announced for East Anglia’s railways. Is it not thecase that across the country this Government are takingpassengers for a ride? [Laughter.]409 410
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersMr McLoughlin: It’s the way they tell ’em! That is
from a party that over 13 years, as the Prime Ministerreminded us, electrified only 13 miles of track—I thinkhe inadvertently misled the House, because I understandthat is was only 9 miles. We have put forward the mostambitious plans for the railways. The only people whoseem not to want to praise that, or even acknowledge it,are those on the Opposition Front Bench.
HS2 Skills Academy
6.Karen Lumley (Redditch) (Con): What plans he
has to set up a High Speed 2 skills academy.
[906433]
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport
(Mr Robert Goodwill): In September the Government
announced that the high-speed rail college will be co-locatedin Birmingham and Doncaster. Work is now under waywith the local authorities concerned to get the collegeup and running. Our goal is for students to be admittedin the academic year 2017-18, which incidentally willcoincide with the start of construction.
Karen Lumley: We need more young people to take
up careers in engineering. What is my hon. Frienddoing to ensure that schools and colleges are aware ofthe opportunities that the HS2 academy can provide?
Mr Goodwill: HS2 is already engaging with schools
and colleges. For example, in November it attended theSkills Show for the first time. We need 10,000 people inengineering just to cope with the demand for skills inthe existing rail investment strategy, and we need another25,000 to deliver HS2.
Mrs Cheryl Gillan (Chesham and Amersham) (Con):
It is all very well helping young people with the HS2skills academy, but it will be on the backs of the peoplewhose properties are blighted by the project. The Ministerneed only read Melissa Kite’s moving article in The
Spectator on the plight of her elderly parents. There is
still no final compensation package, after five years, andHS2 officials are trying to beat home owners down onthe independent valuations of their properties. It isshaming that we have still not settled compensationmatters after five years. When is the Minister going tosort out this shambles?
Mr Goodwill: The need-to-sell scheme will be operating
in the new year, and we are currently consulting on it. Imust point out that part of the skills agenda is investmentin skills for tunnelling. We are engaging in unprecedentedlevels of tunnelling to limit environmental impacts. Theskills college will be a hub-and-spoke arrangement, andwe are looking for colleges that can teach environmentalskills to engage with it so that we can deliver on ourpromise of no net biodiversity loss.
Congestion
7.Sir Greg Knight (East Y orkshire) (Con): What
recent steps he has taken to reduce congestion onroads.
[906434]
The Minister of State, Department for Transport (Mr John
Hayes): The Government have an ambitious strategy
for tackling congestion and improving the performanceof our roads. As I have said, the road investment
strategy sets out plans to invest £15 billion to enhancestrategic roads between 2015 and 2021. The investmentplan includes 15 schemes in Y orkshire and the north-east.In addition, as my right hon. Friend will know, EastRiding has secured £4.4 million from the local growthfund for the Bridlington integrated transport plan phase 2.
Sir Greg Knight: Will my right hon. Friend take a
further step towards securing his reputation as a radicalpolitician by dealing with avoidable congestion? Is heaware that thousands of motorists travelling at non-rushhour times often find themselves stuck in a traffic jam attraffic lights for no reason whatsoever? Why cannotsome of these traffic lights be turned off, as is done inother countries?
Mr Hayes: Among my right hon. Friend’s many
distinctions is his chairmanship of the all-party historicvehicles group, of which I am merely a humble member.He will recognise that the kind of innovation—the kindof radicalism—that he suggests is always close to theheart of this Government and this Ministry. We do nothave plans to do what he says, but I will certainlyconsider it. There are 15 schemes in Y orkshire and thenorth-east. Was it Pound who said that a genius canrecognise 10 things but an ordinary man can recogniseonly one? I can recognise 15.
Meg Munn (Sheffield, Heeley) (Lab/Co-op): The use
of the hard shoulder as an extra lane on motorways atpeak times has been shown to be successful in improvingsafety and reducing congestion. However, using thehard shoulder outside peak times will lead to a greaternumber of accidents, and the police have warned that itshould not be done. Will the Minister look again at thispolicy and ensure that we do not see more deaths andserious incidents on our motorways as a result of usinghard shoulders outside peak times when they are notneeded?
Mr Hayes: The hon. Lady is right to recognise that
smart motorways are partly about using the capacity ofthe hard shoulder as an important way of easing congestion.She is right, too, that safety has to be a prime considerationin all such matters, so we will look at the evidence. If theevidence suggests that we need to alter policy, we will,but my judgment is that so far it does not show that thisbehaviour is dangerous.
Philip Davies (Shipley) (Con): The Secretary of State,
in particular, will know how important the Shipleyeastern bypass is in relieving congestion and stimulatingeconomic activity in my constituency. The Governmenthave given a considerable amount of money to thecombined Labour west Y orkshire authorities for transportinfrastructure schemes to relieve congestion. What stepswill his Department take to make those Labour councilsmake sure that all parts of west Y orkshire benefit, notjust their Labour heartlands?
Mr Hayes: My hon. Friend is right that when one
looks at infrastructural spending one needs to do so ona consensual basis. For example, both Front-Benchteams will be working together on the InfrastructureBill to make sure, irrespective of party, that it provides a411 412
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral Answersfoundation for the future. It is absolutely right that
when we look at these things we should cut acrossnarrow party divides.
Andrew Gwynne (Denton and Reddish) (Lab): One of
the best ways of tackling road congestion is to haveproper inter-modal integration. The Minister mightknow that the M60-M67 junction interchange at Dentonis not just one of the most dangerous in the country butone of the most congested, and currently subject topinch-point infrastructure works. Next to it is Dentonstation, which has the most pathetic rail service in thecountry, with just one train, in one direction only, oncea week. Will he bang heads together at Northern Trains,Network Rail and Transport for Greater Manchester sothat we can have a proper train service from Dentoninto Manchester, as that will be crucial as part of thenorthern hub work?
Mr Speaker: I was going to suggest that the hon.
Gentleman apply for an Adjournment debate on thesubject until I realised that he had already had it.
Mr Hayes: Not for the first time, Mr Speaker, you
took the words out of my mouth. The hon. Gentlemansuggests that, as far as rail in his constituency is concerned,you can get there but you cannot get back. He isabsolutely right to say that we should look at suchthings in an integrated way, and this is not the first timehe has raised the issue: he has raised it a number oftimes in the Chamber. If he looks at the plans weannounced earlier this week, he will see that, in relationto rail, ports and roads, we are working on the sort ofintegration he describes, to make sure that all modes oftransport fit.
Rail North Electrification Taskforce
8.Stephen Mosley (City of Chester) (Con): When he
expects the Rail North electrification taskforce topublish its report.
[906435]
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr Patrick
McLoughlin): A wide range of electrification schemes is
being considered by the taskforce of northern MPs andcouncil leaders set up to explore the priorities for futureelectrification in the north. The taskforce expects toprovide me with an interim report in February 2015setting out its recommended priorities for schemedevelopment in future rail funding control periods from2019.
Stephen Mosley: The electrification of the Crewe-Chester
line and beyond into north Wales has gained the supportof local businesses, local councils, local MPs and eventhe Welsh Assembly, and the results of the report areeagerly awaited. How can members of the public alsomake sure that their views are heard?
Mr McLoughlin: I am interested in the points my
hon. Friend has raised. That is one of the reasons we setup the taskforce and I think its membership is widelyknown. I understand that it will meet later today and Ieagerly await the report in 2015.
Mr Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield) (Lab/Co-op): Many
Opposition Members are fond of the Secretary of State,but this morning he has been unusually full of blusterabout the northern powerhouse and rail electrification.
Will he not admit the truth that the botched privatisationthat carved up the franchising between Railtrack andthe operators was ruinous, and that nothing will happenin our rail system until we get rid of that botchedprivatisation?
Mr McLoughlin: I was informed that the hon. Gentleman
sent out some interesting tweets when he was last on theeast coast main line, saying it had been a disaster since ithad been privatised, when actually it was being run bydirect operators at the time. As far as blustering isconcerned, I think the hon. Gentleman blusters toomuch. He is jealous of the success and work we areputting in to the northern powerhouse and to improvingnot only our railways but our roads right across thecountry.
Mr Sheerman: On a point of order, Mr Speaker. The
right hon. Gentleman is misleading the House aboutmy tweets!
Mr Speaker: I think the hon. Gentleman can raise his
point of order, to which we look forward with eageranticipation, later on. We are saving him up—that iswhat we are doing.
Andrew Percy (Brigg and Goole) (Con): May I thank
the Secretary of State for his earlier reply regardingdirect services from Cleethorpes through Barnetby andfrom Scunthorpe to Manchester? That is really important.We are not ungrateful, but may I now push him on theelectrification of the south Humber line? We know it isa complex project because of the amount of trade usedon the route, but could some research be done on it?
Mr McLoughlin: I am glad that I have pleased my
hon. Friend on one particular subject, on which he andmy hon. Friend the Member for Cleethorpes (MartinVickers) led a successful campaign. On electrification,we are now starting work on what will be in the nextcontrol period and I will take what my hon. Friend theMember for Brigg and Goole (Andrew Percy) has justsaid as part of those representations.
Andy McDonald (Middlesbrough) (Lab): If Tees valley
and its mighty industries are to play their full role in themuch vaunted northern powerhouse, it is essential thatthe electrification of the east coast line from Northallertonto Middlesbrough and on to Tees port—the UK’s secondlargest exporting port—be prioritised. Will the Secretaryof State ensure that that section of line is included inthe forthcoming schedule?
Mr McLoughlin: I have set up a taskforce to give me a
report, and I am not going to say what will be in thereport before I have even received it. As I said earlier,the taskforce is looking at some 72 routes at the moment.
Andy McDonald: Give them a nudge.
Mr McLoughlin: The hon. Gentleman says from a
sedentary position, “Give them a nudge.” I think he hasjust done that.413 414
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersFirstGroup (Great Western Main Line)
9.Jessica Morden (Newport East) (Lab): What recent
discussions his Department has had with FirstGroupon service performance on the Great Western mainline.
[906439]
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr Patrick
McLoughlin): Officials hold meetings with First Great
Western every four weeks to discuss franchise performance.Ministers and officials regularly meet senior figuresfrom across the industry at a range of forums to discusscurrent issues, including performance. We have made itclear that we expect the industry to do its utmost todeliver the level of performance for which it is funded.
Jessica Morden: Will the Secretary of State ensure
that the new Great Western main line franchise takesinto account the very real present overcrowding problemsin south-east Wales, and ensure that the operator providesan adequate number of carriages to service demandnow and on future forecasts?
Mr McLoughlin: One of the things that I have done
with that franchise is to make arrangements and instructthe operator, as it is doing, to convert first-class carriagesinto standard-class carriages. That will increase capacitya little on the line. The line has been very successfuloverall. In 2010-11, the number of passengers using thefranchise was 90.5 million; on the latest figures available,for 2013-14, the number was 99.7 million. We are seeingsuch a rise across the whole rail franchise sector.
Duncan Hames (Chippenham) (LD): The Secretary
of State was kind enough to meet me and nine otherMPs to discuss improvements to our part of this franchise.My last two journeys from Chippenham to Londonbegan with me seated on the floor of the carriage—onone of them, alongside a young woman and her crutches.Does he accept that it will take not only convertedbuffet cars but additional services to meet the demandon the line?
Mr McLoughlin: I agree with my hon. Friend to a
degree. We are seeing that right across the whole railwaysector, and I am very proud of it: such revolutionaryperformance has been brought about by franchisingand the imagination of franchising. It is rather disappointingthat a party that used franchising for 13 years nowcondemns it.
Port Regulation
10.Mrs Mary Glindon (North Tyneside) (Lab): What
the outcome was of the recent European negotiationson port regulation.
[906441]
The Minister of State, Department for Transport (Mr John
Hayes): The Government recognised the detrimental
effect that the proposed port services regulation in itsoriginal form would have had on the UK ports industry.At the Transport Council in October, we succeeded inour main negotiating aim of ensuring that the Counciltext was amended to protect our ports industry bylimiting its application and by taking better account ofthe interests of already competitive ports such as ours.Mrs Glindon: What work has the Minister carried out
with European partners through the process to ensurethat trade union recognition and collective bargainingare explicitly protected, while still respecting the autonomyof social partners?
Mr Hayes: The hon. Lady may know that I am a
trade unionist. My father was a shop steward, and mygrandfather was chairman of his union branch.
Ian Lucas (Wrexham) (Lab): What went wrong?
Mr Hayes: I saw the light.
On the specific question the hon. Member for North
Tyneside (Mrs Glindon) asks, I have had regular dialoguewith unions to do just what she describes.
Mr Speaker: The Minister of State can deposit in the
Library of the House a note on his family history,which I feel sure will be eagerly sought after.
Mr Gordon Marsden (Blackpool South) (Lab): If it
ain’t broke, don’t fix it. In our thriving ports sector,everyone—businesses, unions, thousands of employees—arefearful of the regulation because it threatens competitivenessand workers’ rights and protections. Given that hisDepartment was so badly mauled in the EuropeanCommittee in September that the Minister had to abandonhis motion, why are we still waiting for concrete results?Despite his pledges, the Government got no support forblocking port regulations in Europe in October. If theGovernment did such a good job in October, why hashe failed to bring his motion back to the House, as hepromised?
Mr Hayes: In the deal we got in October, we got our
ports excluded from the majority of this unwelcome,unnecessary and undesirable regulation, and on othermatters not included in that exemption we agreed thatthis House should make the decision. I call that achievementa victory, and the hon. Gentleman would be well advisedto welcome it.
Topical Questions
T1.
[906448] Rehman Chishti (Gillingham and Rainham)
(Con): If he will make a statement on his departmentalresponsibilities.
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr Patrick
McLoughlin): On Monday 17 November I announced
£25 million to support community transport providers,and that fund will provide hundreds of new minibusesto community transport operators in rural and isolatedareas. Those groups help keep rural communities aliveand independent, and it is vital to do all we can tosupport local voluntary operators in those areas.
Rehman Chishti: Following the announcement that
the c2c rail franchise will issue automatic refunds tocommuters delayed by more than two minutes, will theGovernment apply pressure to other franchises such asSoutheastern to follow that example?
Mr McLoughlin: One reason why c2c’s franchise
was awarded is that it came forward with imaginativeschemes. What my hon. Friend has outlined is an importantdevelopment on that commuter route, and I look toimprove services across the whole of rail franchising.415 416
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersT3.[906450] Diana Johnson (Kingston upon Hull North)
(Lab): In light of the Chancellor making much of thenorthern powerhouse yesterday—but of course forgettingto mention Hull—when will the Secretary of Statemake a positive announcement about the privately financedscheme to electrify the line to Hull?
Mr McLoughlin: Yesterday my right hon. Friend the
Chancellor made a number of announcements—indeed,he was criticised by some for putting too much in thoseannouncements. As the hon. Lady will remember, Iprovided the money to move that scheme up to the nextstage on the guide to rail investment process some timeago, and I await the outcome of that work.
T2.
[906449] Stephen Metcalfe (South Basildon and
East Thurrock) (Con): As a result of increased rail use,level crossings in my constituency, particularly at EastTilbury, are spending longer closed. Not only does thatcause severe delays to traffic and commuters, it putslives at risk. Will my right hon. Friend meet me and putpressure on the Treasury to make more moneyavailable to deal with level crossings?
Mr McLoughlin: A lot of work is currently being
done with Network Rail and on that particular portand scheme. I will report back to my hon. Friend andask for a direct report on that matter.
T4.
[906451] Karl Turner (Kingston upon Hull East)
(Lab): Hard working and dedicated rail workers on theeast coast main line are worried about their jobs,following the ideologically driven privatisation of thatline. What will the Minister do to ensure that those jobsare not put at risk?
Mr McLoughlin: Rail journeys have increased from
750 million to 1.6 billion and jobs on the railway areincreasing, yet all Labour can do is start saying thatsomehow jobs will be cut. More services will be operatingon that line than ever before, and that will mean morejobs.
T6.
[906453] Mr Philip Hollobone (Kettering) (Con):
Will the Under-Secretary of State for Transport, myhon. Friend the Member for Scarborough and Whitby(Mr Goodwill) be kind enough to meet me and adelegation from Kettering borough council to discusshow the potential future decriminalisation of parkingin the borough of Kettering might best be handled?
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport
(Mr Robert Goodwill): We are keen for local authorities
to take over civil enforcement of their parking, but Iknow that the situation in my hon. Friend’s constituencyis not as simple as in other parts of the country. I wouldbe delighted to meet him and discuss the issue further.
T5.
[906452] Tom Blenkinsop (Middlesbrough South
and East Cleveland) (Lab): In 2008 the LabourGovernment invested £18 million into Tees valley busservices, one of which—the 37—linked Park End withJames Cook university hospital. That service is nowunder threat due to 24% cuts from this Government tolocal bus services. At the end of August theGovernment also closed Park End’s medical centre,which had been opened by the previous LabourGovernment. People in that area now have no access to
medical services, except for the 37 bus, which theconsultation at the time said linked Park End with thelocal hospital. Will Ministers meet me and the localauthority to ensure that we keep that vital bus service?
Mr Goodwill: Outside London more than 40% of
money going into bus services comes from the Governmentone way or another, but many local bus services areunder pressure because of the pressure placed on localauthorities. A new station at James Cook hospital meansthat people who use the rail line from Whitby in myconstituency, or Middlesbrough in the hon. Gentleman’sconstituency, can access the hospital by train, whichwas not the case previously.
T7.
[906454] Neil Carmichael (Stroud) (Con): With
the renaissance of railways under way through thisGovernment’s excellent work, will the Secretary ofState consider letting my constituents travel fromStonehouse to Bristol without going via Swindon, byreopening an existing station from some time ago?
Mr McLoughlin: It is for local authorities to determine
whether a new station at Stonehouse on the Gloucesterto Bristol line is the best way to meet local transportneeds. It is for them to demonstrate the business case forsecuring it, but I am more than happy to work with myhon. Friend and to facilitate communications betweenhim and Network Rail to see whether a solution can bereached.
Mr Speaker: Michael Connarty, not here.
T10.
[906457] Ian Lavery (Wansbeck) (Lab): Following
the Smith commission last week, I have a great fear thatmy constituency, which is lodged between the last cityin England and the Scottish borders, will fast become apolitical no man’s land. With that in mind, will theSecretary of State ensure that the Ashington, Blyth andTyne line is reintroduced without further delay? Will heagree to meet me and other interested parties further todiscuss the issue?
Mr McLoughlin: I understand that Northumberland
county council intends to undertake a more detailedstudy into the reopening of the line. I will be interestedto see the results when it is completed. In the meantime,I can confirm that the next northern franchise will berequired to co-operate with the development of theproject. I would be delighted to meet the hon. Gentlemanif he wishes.
T8.
[906455] Julian Smith (Skipton and Ripon) (Con):
Will the Secretary of State confirm that the importantdaily service from Skipton to London and back isretained within the excellent east coast franchise deal,and that it will have all the benefits accruing from therest of the deal?
The Minister of State, Department for Transport (Mr John
Hayes): My hon. Friend will know that the service to
Skipton will continue at today’s levels. I can confirmthat the changes to the east coast main line will not putthat in jeopardy. As he will also know, those changes onthat important line will bring more journeys, moreopportunities and more investment.417 418
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersKate Green (Stretford and Urmston) (Lab): Last
month, a child was hit by a car outside Flixton juniorschool in my constituency. Parents are worried aboutour children’s safety—more so—because Trafford councilplans to withdraw 31 school road crossing patrols in theborough, including 23 in my constituency. Will theMinister join me in condemning the local authority’sshort-sighted decision and urge it to put our children’ssafety first?
Mr Goodwill: Obviously, the safety of our children
outside school is paramount, which is why, for example,we have made it easier for local authorities to introduce20 mph limits. I am pleased that we have retained theuse of cameras for enforcement of parking restrictionson those zigzag lines. Spending on the type of patrol thehon. Lady mentions is a matter for local authorities. Iam sure they will consider their priorities in that regard.
Mike Thornton (Eastleigh) (LD): Sections of the
M27 in my constituency—the busiest motorway permile in the country—are so noisy that local residentsare unable to open their windows in the stifling summersthat climate change has brought us, and that affectstheir health and sanity. My constituency continues towait for resurfacing, so will the Minister please investigatethe provision of effective noise barriers to save myresidents’ health and sanity?
Mr Hayes: Yes, this issue is rightly raised by a number
of hon. Members. We have taken action to reduce noiseon some key roads and I hear what he says about theM27. There will be money for extensive resurfacing—weare talking about resurfacing 80% of the nation’s roads—and I will look at his case in that spirit.
Ian Lucas (Wrexham) (Lab): Is the Secretary of State
aware that the rail investment in Cheshire is betweenWrexham and Chester, where the Labour WelshGovernment are redoubling the single track line createdby the Tories in the 1980s? Will he therefore commit tosupporting investment in rail infrastructure in northWales in the same way that the UK Government haveinvested in south Wales?
Mr McLoughlin: I am pleased the hon. Gentleman
recognises the huge amount of electrification in southWales. We need to look at how we improve connectionsin north Wales. I am talking to my right hon. Friend theSecretary of State for Wales about that.
HOUSE OF COMMONS COMMISSION
The hon. Member for Caithness, Sutherland and Easter
Ross, representing the House of Commons Commission,
was asked—
Commission on Digital Democracy
1.Stephen Mosley (City of Chester) (Con): What
recent progress has been made by the Speaker’scommission on digital democracy; and when he expectsthat Commission to publish its proposals.
[906418]John Thurso (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross):
Mr Speaker, the specifics of the work of your commissionare not directly the responsibility of the House ofCommons Commission. However, I understand thatwork is at an advanced stage, and that it is planning topublish its report on 21 January.
Stephen Mosley: Eighteen-year-old Rachael Farrington
from Cheshire has established the successful “VotingCounts” website and social media campaign, whichintends to engage young people with politics and encouragethem to vote. How is the Commission working withyoung e-activists like Rachael to encourage young peopleto get involved with parliamentary democracy?
John Thurso: I congratulate my hon. Friend’s constituent
on her work. It sounds absolutely fascinating. All I cantell him, as far as the Commission is concerned, is thatthe commissioners heard evidence on this matter and itwill be reflected in its report. However, it is not for me toanticipate that. In addition to the more traditionalevidence sessions, the commissioners met a wide rangeof people in a number of towns and cities in the UnitedKingdom.
John Cryer (Leyton and Wanstead) (Lab): Is there
not a fear that any introduction of electronic voting,which is partly what we are talking about, could giverise to abuses? Would it not be more sensible to stickwith the system we have now on the basis that if it is notbroken, don’t fix it?
John Thurso: I have to again point out that the House
of Commons Commission is not actually responsiblefor this matter, so as its spokesman I cannot commenton it. However, I know that Mr Speaker, whose commissionit is, has heard what has been said and I am sure that itwill be taken into account.
Robert Halfon (Harlow) (Con): Is my right hon.
Friend aware that the Speaker’s Commission on DigitalDemocracy is looking at innovative ways of engagingwith the public on democracy, including e-voting andother matters? Does he not think that we should considersuch important ways forward in conjunction withconsideration of how the public regard voting anddemocracy in the present day?
John Thurso: My hon. Friend makes an exceptionally
good point which I may personally support. However,as the spokesman for the Commission, I have to refer tothe answer I have already given and say that I am surehis words have been heard by those who need to hearthem.
Mr Speaker: I call Mr Andrew Bridgen. Not here.
LEADER OF THE HOUSE
The Leader of the House was asked—
Ministerial Announcements (Guidance)
3.Nic Dakin (Scunthorpe) (Lab): What guidance he
has given to his ministerial colleagues on makingannouncements to the House before the media.
[906420]419 420 4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersThe First Secretary of State and Leader of the House
of Commons (Mr William Hague): The ministerial code
is clear. When Parliament is in Session the most importantannouncements of Government policy should be madein the first instance to Parliament, and I regularlyremind my colleagues of this.
Nic Dakin: I thank the Leader of the House for his
answer. He said the ministerial code is clear. That seemsstrange to me, because the statement we heard from theChancellor yesterday had a familiar ring to it—I hadread most of it in the Sunday papers. Will he clarifyagain whether the ministerial code should be observedrather than ignored?
Mr Hague: Well of course it should be observed, but
I think the hon. Gentleman chooses a rather poorexample for his argument. There was a great deal in theChancellor’s statement yesterday that came as a completesurprise to this House and to the wider world, both inthe economic forecasts of the Office for BudgetResponsibility and in the many specific measures. Theautumn statement truly showed that announcementsare being made in Parliament.
Mr Philip Hollobone (Kettering) (Con): Will my right
hon. Friend seek to build on his already fearsomereputation for parliamentary innovation by consideringthe use of Westminster Hall for oral ministerial statements?
Mr Hague: I am not sure how much that would add
to my fearsome reputation, although I am always happyto attempt to add to such a thing. We have not hadany shortage of capacity to make oral statements hereon the Floor of the House. I think there have been38 statements in this Session so far and we have alwaysbeen able to accommodate them. If we ever get to thepoint where they could not be accommodated, we shouldlook at the point my hon. Friend makes.
Kevin Brennan (Cardiff West) (Lab): May I disagree
with my hon. Friend the Member for Scunthorpe (NicDakin)? Has the situation not gone so far now thateverything in the autumn statement should be announcedthrough the press? At least then we would have a chanceto debate it all in advance, rather than it being used bythe Chancellor to pull a rabbit out of the hat in apolitical sense by announcing it in the House in thatvery unfair way?
Mr Hague: Opposition Members cannot have it both
ways. Well, they can try to have it both ways—we haveheard both arguments from those on the OppositionBack Benches. That perhaps shows that everything relatingto the autumn statement was presented in the correctway. As someone who served as Leader of the Oppositionwhen Alastair Campbell was advising the Governmentof Tony Blair, I do not need any lectures from anybodyabout announcements being made in the press ratherthan elsewhere.
Written Answers
4.Mrs Mary Glindon (North Tyneside) (Lab): What
guidance he has given to his ministerial colleaguesabout providing substantive answers to written questions.
[906421]The Deputy Leader of the House of Commons (Tom
Brake): The Office of the Leader of the House of
Commons provides guidance to all Departments on thepractice of answering parliamentary questions. Theguidance advises Departments that Members shouldreceive a substantive response to their named day questionon the date specified and should endeavour to answerordinary written questions within a working week ofbeing tabled.
Mrs Glindon: The Government’s official guidance on
written questions requires answers to be both accurateand truthful, and not highly politicised. Yet writtenanswers recently received from a number of Ministers,most notably a Minister of State from the CabinetOffice, have been of a party political character. Will theLeader of the House ensure that his ministerial colleaguesare aware of the proper processes to be followed whenanswering questions?
Tom Brake: If the hon. Lady has issues about the
speed with which questions are being answered or theircontent, that is clearly a matter she can raise with theProcedure Committee. It is best that she provides thebackground information, but if she wants to provideme with the examples she has mentioned, I would behappy to follow them up with the relevant Secretaries ofthe State.
Mr David Nuttall (Bury North) (Con): May I follow
up that point and remind the House that in recentmonths the Procedure Committee has invited twoSecretaries of the State and their permanent secretariesto appear before it to explain their lack of performance?If Members of any party have any concerns about thecontent or timeliness of their answers, they shouldbring the matter to the attention of the ProcedureCommittee.
Tom Brake: I am grateful for that point of clarification
or information. When Departments want to respondpromptly, they can do so. I have frequently quoted theability of the Department of Health, for example, torespond to 99% of questions within the appropriatetime scales, and I am now happy to be able to refer tothe Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which has beenable to respond to 100% of them within the appropriatetime scales.
Thomas Docherty (Dunfermline and West Fife) (Lab):
One of the Secretaries of State dragged to the ProcedureCommittee was from the Ministry of Justice, whichprovides one of the worst examples of Ministers dodgingtheir responsibilities and parliamentary scrutiny. Underthe current Lord Chancellor, fewer than one in fivequestions was answered on time in the last Session.That is because, as he has admitted, his own specialadvisers are vetting every answer. Do we not need moresubstance and less spin from Ministers?
Tom Brake: I am sure that the Ministry of Justice is
not dodging its responsibilities. I do, however, thinkthat there is a very strong case for that Ministry toimprove its performance quite significantly. I will raisethat issue with the Secretary of State.421 422
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersYouth Parliament
5. Robert Jenrick (Newark) (Con): What
representations he has received on the 2014 session ofthe Y outh Parliament; and if he will make a statement.
[906422]
The First Secretary of State and Leader of the House
of Commons (Mr William Hague): I was very pleased to
speak in the UK Y outh Parliament’s debate in thisChamber on 14 November. The level of debate wasextremely high, and I have ensured that all relevantMinisters have been made aware of the contributionsthat took place.
Robert Jenrick: Mr Eddie Fenwick, the Member of
the Y outh Parliament for Newark, sends his thanks tothe Leader of the House and Mr Speaker. He hugelyenjoyed the day. One topic debated was the franchiseand whether 16 and 17-year-olds such as Mr Fenwickshould have the right to vote. Perhaps surprisingly, pollssuggest that 16 and 17-year-olds do not want to votebecause they feel they do not have the confidence toaddress the issues. Would my right hon. Friend considerproviding a debate on raising the quality of politicaleducation in this country to increase confidence amongyoung people?
Mr Hague: I send my regards to Mr Fenwick and
everybody who took part in the Y outh Parliament debate,which was an extremely encouraging spectacle, concerningthe level of education and commitment of young peopleto political debate in this country. There are stronglyheld views for and against lowering the voting age to16—including among young people, as my hon. Friendsays—but I continue to encourage every possible effortto raise the level of political education and discussion,including this week at the 25th A-level politics annualstudent conference, which a couple of thousand studentsattended and I addressed.
Julie Hilling (Bolton West) (Lab): Without youth
workers, there would be no election of, or support for,members of the Y outh Parliament, so will the right hon.Gentleman make representations to the Cabinet Officeagainst the destruction of youth services nationally, sothat this great fantastic institution of the UK Y outhParliament can continue?
Mr Hague: I am sure that this great innovation will
continue, because it has real momentum, and young peopleare fascinated by it. Hundreds of thousands took partin the decisions about which motions should be debated.Local authorities have an important role in supportingthe Y outh Parliament, and it is important that theycontinue that support in whatever way they can.
Tessa Munt (Wells) (LD): Let me again place on
record my thanks to all the staff who made that day sosuccessful. I wonder whether you, Mr Speaker, havediscussed with the Leader of the House the possibilityof extending the opportunity for young people to speak,perhaps in another Chamber such as Westminster Hall.It has been suggested that we might afford them slightlymore time in which to deal with the issues that they feelare so important.
Mr Hague: I join my hon. Friend in placing on record
the thanks of—I think—all Members to the staff of theHouse, who did a great deal to make the Y outh Parliamentpossible. It is worth considering the idea of extending
the time available to them by enabling some of them tosit in other parts of the House, and I am sure that wecan look into that together, Mr Speaker.
Smith Commission
6.Mark Pawsey (Rugby) (Con): What the
implications are of the Smith commission report forfurther discussions of devolution in the House.
[906423]
9.Miss Anne McIntosh (Thirsk and Malton) (Con):
What the implications are of the Smith commissionreport for further discussions of devolution in theHouse.
[906426]
10.Geoffrey Clifton-Brown (The Cotswolds) (Con):
What the implications are of the Smith commissionreport for further discussions of devolution in theHouse.
[906427]
The First Secretary of State and Leader of the House
of Commons (Mr William Hague): The Government are
committed to publishing draft clauses based on theSmith commission report by 25 January 2015. I willreport to the House in due course on further progress inrelation to the devolution of powers within the UnitedKingdom, and on the consequences for England.
Mark Pawsey: As the House considers the report,
there will be much talk about how combined city authoritiescan become the vehicles for devolution in England.That will make it increasingly necessary for authoritiesto come together in the west midlands, where there isstill no agreement. Will the Leader of the House ensurethat the position of shire counties and rural areas isfully taken into account, so that everyone in Englandhas an opportunity to benefit?
Mr Hague: That is an extremely important point,
and, as a north Y orkshire Member of Parliament, I amcertainly very conscious of it. There is a huge opportunityfor local authorities to take up the challenge that hasbeen taken up by Manchester, and to reach the sameagreement with the Chancellor. However, this does notonly involve metropolitan areas or conurbations; thereare also major opportunities for county councils andrural authorities in general to make such plans, and weshould encourage them to do so.
Miss McIntosh: I congratulate my right hon. Friend
on delivering the Smith commission’s conclusions intolegislation, but does he share my worry that the voice ofrural communities such as North Y orkshire countycouncil, and indeed the moneys for transport infrastructureand other projects, may well be adversely affected if theplans for the city region and the northern powerhousego ahead in the form that I fear that they may take?
Mr Hague: It is of course important for the whole
concept of the northern powerhouse to work for peoplethroughout the north of England and for rural as wellas urban areas to benefit from it. Given the locations ofour constituencies, my hon. Friend and I will both bevery insistent that that should happen. It is certainlypossible for the whole of the north to benefit from theuplift in prosperity, skills, transport infrastructure and423 424
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral Answerssuperfast broadband, because the Government have
put together a stronger set of measures for the north ofEngland than any other Government in recent decades.
Geoffrey Clifton-Brown: I am sure my right hon.
Friend is well aware that my constituents are very keenon English votes for English laws. How will he implementthat, and how does the Smith commission recommendthat it—as well as devo-max in Scotland—should beimplemented in a way that will not lead to a break-up ofthe Union?
Mr Hague: The Government will shortly publish a
Command Paper setting out the options for what havebecome known as English votes for English laws, as wellas plans for further decentralisation within England. Ihope to publish it before Christmas, and will seek tomake a statement in the House, following which weshall all be able to consider together how to proceedwith those plans.Andrew Gwynne (Denton and Reddish) (Lab): May I
ask the Leader of the House how far he intends to takethe logic of English votes for English laws, given thatwith the devolution to Greater Manchester I will nolonger be able to vote, as a Greater Manchester MP, onmany of those issues, but will be able to vote on thosesame issues in the right hon. Gentleman’s constituency?
Mr Hague: I have invited the Opposition to present
their own proposals, but they have refused to take partin any discussions with the Cabinet Committee. I wrotelast week to the deputy leader of the Labour party toask it to present its proposals that we could publish inthe Command Paper I have just been talking about. Ihave not yet had any positive response to that. The hon.Gentleman might want to encourage that response. It isvery important of course that whatever solution wearrive at is fair to all parts of the United Kingdom, butthat includes being fair to the voters of England as wellas to the rest of the UK.425 426
4 DECEMBER 2014 Oral Answers Oral AnswersBusiness of the House
10.35 am
Thomas Docherty (Dunfermline and West Fife) (Lab):
Will the Leader of the House give us the business fornext week?
The First Secretary of State and Leader of the House
of Commons (Mr William Hague): The business for next
week is as follows:
M
ONDAY 8D ECEMBER —Second Reading of the
Infrastructure Bill [Lords].
TUESDAY 9D ECEMBER —Consideration in Committee
of the Counter-Terrorism and Security Bill (day 1).
WEDNESDAY 10 D ECEMBER —Second Reading of the
Stamp Duty Land Tax Bill, followed by considerationof Lords amendments to the Wales Bill.
T
HURSDAY 11 D ECEMBER —General debate on the fishing
industry, followed by general debate on Ukraine andUK relations with Russia. The subjects for both debateswere determined by the Backbench Business Committee.
F
RIDAY 12 D ECEMBER —The House will not be sitting.
The provisional business for the week commencing
15 December will include:
MONDAY 15 D ECEMBER —Consideration in Committee
of the Counter-Terrorism and Security Bill (day 2).
TUESDAY 16 D ECEMBER —Conclusion of consideration
in Committee of the Counter-Terrorism and SecurityBill.
W
EDNESDAY 17 D ECEMBER —Opposition day (11th allotted
day). There will be a debate on an Opposition motion.Subject to be announced.
T
HURSDAY 18 D ECEMBER —Business to be nominated
by the Backbench Business Committee.
FRIDAY 19 D ECEMBER —The House will not be sitting.
Thomas Docherty: I thank the Leader of the House
for announcing next week’s business. I hope he is nottoo disappointed that my hon. Friend the Member forWallasey (Ms Eagle) is unable to be here today—althoughwe are disappointed every week by the continued absenceof the Government Chief Whip.
This morning the Procedure Committee publishes its
report on proposals for the introduction of the jointParliament/Government e-petition system. Given that anumber of Procedure Committee reports are now awaitingdebate, may I press the Leader of the House to saywhen he will find the necessary time?
The House recently voted overwhelmingly on Second
Reading in favour of the Bill of my hon. Friend theMember for Eltham (Clive Efford) to scrap the top-downreorganisation of the NHS. This Government have atendency to fail to produce money resolutions for Billsthey do not like, so will the Leader of the Houseconfirm that the money resolution for this Bill will bebrought to the House before Christmas—and, if not,why not?
The Leader will be aware of early-day motion 454,
which has been signed by over 250 Members fromacross the House.[That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty,
praying that the Firefighters’ Pension Scheme (England)Regulations 2014 (S.I., 2014, No. 2848), dated 23 October2014, a copy of which was laid before this House on28 October, be annulled.]
Firefighters’ pensions in England have been seriously
mismanaged by the Government, and we will haveanother strike next week. We need a debate and a voteon the Floor of the House against the regulations, sowill the Leader of the House provide us with one, andwill he tell us when it will take place?
This week the Ministry of Defence’s annual report
showed that more than £5.5 billion has been wasted inthe last year alone owing to a catalogue of procurementdisasters—which, of course, is nothing new for thisGovernment. In 2010, the Government, having scrappedHMS Ark Royal, sold Britain’s Harrier jump jet fleet tothe US Marine Corps. According to the US official whocompleted the purchase, the deal was
“like we’re buying a car with maybe 15,000 miles on it. These are
very good platforms.”
Now, just four years later, after a pair of U-turns on
the carrier’s design that have cost the British taxpayer£100 million, the Royal Navy has been forced to go capin hand to the very same US Marines to ask them to flyoff our carriers, so they will be flying our formerHarriers from our carrier because our replacement aircraftwill not be ready for another three years. The DefenceSecretary has refused to come to this House to explainwhat has happened, so will the Leader of the Housenow ask him to do so, and will he also tell the Housewhen we can expect the Second Reading of the armedforces Bill that we were anticipating next week?
Is the truth not that on every test this Government
have set themselves they have failed? Last Friday, thePrime Minister gave his latest speech to end all speecheson Europe, yet within hours Home Office Ministerswere dragged to this Chamber to explain why their “noifs, no buts” solemn promise to slash net migration hadbeen broken. The hon. Member for Shipley (PhilipDavies), in his ever-helpful manner, described the latestimmigration figures as “catastrophic”. On the NHS, theGovernment promised no top-down reorganisation andthen delivered one that cost £3 billion. On V AT, theypromised no rises but then raised it to 20% and now willnot rule out another rise. They promised a bigger Armybut have sacked thousands of combat soldiers. Yesterday’sautumn statement proved comprehensively that thisGovernment have failed every test and broken everypromise they have ever made on the economy: they hada “five-year plan” to eliminate the deficit but their planis now running four years behind schedule; they promisedto bring down borrowing but they are going to borrow£12.5 billion more than they planned this year and next;and they promised that living standards would rise yearon year, but their own figures reveal that those infull-time work are £2,000 a year worse off, while millionaireshave seen their taxes fall. It is no wonder the DeputyPrime Minister felt the need to flee to Land’s End. Heapparently said that he thought it would be a nicechange to leave Westminster—I am sure his constituentswill be glad to assist in May.
Instead of working to build a recovery that works for
everyone in our country, this Government seem moreconcerned with smoke and mirrors, and with playingparliamentary games. This was a microwave statement—a427 428
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the Housereheating of leftover announcements that looks better
than it tastes: on flooding, the Government justre-announced their announcement from last year; theirroads announcement is a retread; and more than a thirdof their “new” NHS spending is old money beingreallocated from within the Department of Health. Toparaphrase a distinguished and retiring parliamentarian:its all right for them, some of them won’t be here in30 or 40 weeks’ time.
Mr Hague: The hon. Gentleman was certainly right
with his first sentence: we do miss the shadow Leader ofthe House. He was spot on with that comment, as shetends to be a little more entertaining. It is a shamebecause he can be very entertaining when he is not atthe Dispatch Box, as he was in his wonderful interviewon the World at One a few weeks ago, which bearsrevisiting. He said:
“The state that the Labour party is in right now is we are in a
dreadful position.”
It is commendable honesty. That was only the beginning,
because he went on to say that the Opposition have
“got to be honest about ourselves…The electorate looks at us and
has no idea what our polices are.”—
[Interruption.] He says, “In Scotland.” So he is talking
only about a large part of the Labour party. That is hisdefence. It is only the place where Labour has 40-oddMembers of Parliament. He continued:
“We have a moribund party in Scotland that seems to think
that infighting is more important than campaigning. And we havea membership that is ageing and inactive.”
There was something about his questions that was a
little bit ageing and inactive.
Let me deal with the hon. Gentleman’s questions
about the business of the House. On e-petitions, welook forward to the Procedure Committee’s report,which I believe is about to be published. I hope that wecan ensure that in this Parliament, before the generalelection, we put in place a new system for e-petitionsthat will be helpful to the electorate, that will serveaccountability and that will allow the House and theGovernment to run a system together. I look forward tothat report and it will be important to debate it, but wecannot schedule such a debate until we have had thereport.
I am not aware of any problem with the money
resolution for the private Member’s Bill the hon. Gentlemanmentioned. He will know that the Bill falls behind manyother private Members’ Bills in the normal proceduresfor such Bills, but there is no issue at present withbringing forward a money resolution on it.
On early-day motion 454 and firefighters, the Opposition
have now asked for a debate on this, but it was only inthe past 24 hours or so that they did so. The regulationswere laid on 28 October. The early-day motion was putdown on 30 October. There have been three Oppositionday debates since then, and it is only now that they askfor a debate. We will of course examine that request, butit has been made only in the past few hours. I mustpoint out that Lord Hutton found the firefighters’pension scheme to be the most expensive in the publicsector and said that it has to be reformed to be sustainable.Members will need to bear that in mind.The hon. Gentleman asked about the Ministry of
Defence budget. I should remind him that those of uswho sat on the National Security Council in 2010 hadto wrestle with a £38 billion black hole that had beenleft by the previous Government and an over-committalof the defence budget greater than the annual defencebudget. The Ministry of Defence had to wrestle withthat, but now, for the first time in many years, its booksactually balance. It has also undertaken many importantprocurement programmes.
The hon. Gentleman asked about immigration while
neglecting to mention the fact that the previous Governmenthad a completely open door on immigration. Some4 million people came to settle in the United Kingdomwithout any control or restriction, so we do not have totake any lessons on that.
The Second Reading of the armed forces Bill will
take place, but we must ensure that yesterday’sannouncement on stamp duty is enacted in law as soonas possible to give certainty to the housing market, sowe have included it in next week’s business. None theless, we remain very committed to the armed forces Bill.
The hon. Gentleman managed to argue that the
Government had failed every test on the economy.Given that the Government have cut the deficit by morethan half, that employment has reached record levels,that inflation is low, that growth is strong, and that wehave had such an excellent week for the economy, we areleft wondering what the Labour party thinks the test forthe economy is. Perhaps the test is whether we, like theprevious Government, have bankrupted the countryand left the public finances in an appalling state. Thatwas the only test that was passed by the LabourGovernment.
I will finish by referring to one of the hon. Gentleman’s
previous statements, which he made in a letter to Membersand not on the “World at One.” He called for a statue ofTony Blair to be put in the Members’ Lobby as soon aspossible. I am pleased that he did not revive that ideatoday, because the right hon. Member for Kirkcaldyand Cowdenbeath (Mr Brown) might reverse his decisionto leave the House in order to prevent such a thing fromhappening. Of course the right hon. Gentleman couldalways lend the hon. Gentleman his doll model of TonyBlair in which he stuck pins for so long in place of astatue. But his economic record is not one we want toemulate. This Government are passing their economictest.
Sir George Young (North West Hampshire) (Con): In
response to my hon. Friend the Member for The Cotswolds(Geoffrey Clifton-Brown), the Leader of the Housesaid, on English votes for English laws, that he plannedto publish a command paper before Christmas, whichwe welcome, setting out the options. He then said thatwe would consider it together. Has he reached agreementwith our coalition partners on the format of that debate,and is he aware that there is a very strong appetiteamong Government Members for a vote on the options?
Mr Hague: There is a very strong appetite, including
on my part, for such a vote. I have reached agreementwithin the coalition on the publication and the formatof the command paper. Shortly, I hope to reach agreementon the contents of the command paper, so my righthon. Friend must bear with me. Once we have published429 430
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the House[Mr Hague]
the command paper, we will then be able to discuss how
we debate it in Parliament and what the format andstructure of any debate might be.
Mr Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield) (Lab/Co-op): Will
the Leader of the House join me in congratulating theInternational Rescue Committee on becoming the charityof the year for the Financial Times ? It is of course led by
David Miliband, a former Member of the House. Indeed,my daughter works for the same charity, so I have avested interest. We are facing two crises—on Ebola andon the running out of the food vouchers and stamps theUN provides to Syrian refugees. There will now not befood for those refugees. Does the Leader of the Housenot feel concerned that this House cannot have a majordebate in Government time on either of those issueswhen there is so little business anyway?
Mr Hague: I join in the hon. Gentleman’s warm
words about the International Rescue Committee, which,as he said, David Miliband heads up, and I wish hisdaughter well in working for it. The committee doesvery important work around the world, and this countryhas a strong record of supporting that work. We are thesecond-largest donor to the refugees and others sufferingin the Syrian crisis, and, as the House knows, we haveled the way in tackling Ebola, particularly in supportingSierra Leone. Over a long period, we have had regularreports from the Secretary of State for InternationalDevelopment; on Ebola, we have also had statementsfrom the Health Secretary; and the Prime Minister hasincorporated these matters into his statements as well.There is, of course, always room for further discussion.The Government do not have general time for debatesfollowing the creation of the Backbench BusinessCommittee, but he could make a very good case onthese matters to that Committee. I will also encouragemy colleagues to make regular statements.
Mrs Cheryl Gillan (Chesham and Amersham) (Con):
The Leader of the House knows there have been debateson the Home Office’s inquiry into child sex abuse, but isthere time for a further debate so that we can explorethe worries of my constituent who is a survivor of abuseand of many others? It would give us an opportunity todiscuss the continuing concerns about the attendantexperience of the panel members, as well as what isconsidered by some to be the still inadequate terms ofreference. The problem is that while it remains a panelinquiry, not a statutory inquiry, there is no due processor due diligence in respect of members and therefore alack of understanding by the survivors about how thepanel members were appointed and why. I am sure heagrees it is important that the inquiry commands theconfidence of the survivors and their representatives,and I would be grateful if he considered giving a bitmore time to this serious issue.
Mr Hague: I have listened carefully to my right hon.
Friend. Of course, the House has just had a debate onthese matters, so I cannot promise an immediate debate,but I know that my right hon. Friend the Home Secretarywill be determined to keep the House up to date on theprogress of the inquiry, and I will tell her about my righthon. Friend’s remarks. After the difficulties with theprevious two chairs, the Home Secretary is determinedto ensure that the inquiry has the credibility and confidence
of which my right hon. Friend rightly speaks. That hasto be ensured in the appointment of the chair and theway the panel works together, and I will certainly encouragethe Home Secretary to keep the House fully informedand up to date.
Pete Wishart (Perth and North Perthshire) (SNP):
One of the most impressive features of the independencereferendum was the participation of 16 and 17-year-olds,who made such a solid contribution to the nationaldebate. The Smith commission proposes devolving electoraladministration to the Scottish Government, meaningthat 16 and 17-year-olds could be enfranchised forScottish elections, but there are concerns it might nothappen in time for 2016. Will the Leader of the Housework with the Scottish Government to ensure thatit will take place, including by considering a furthersection 30 order?
Mr Hague: The Secretary of State for Scotland referred
to that matter in his statement, so I think the hon.Gentleman has already had a clear answer. Whateverside we argued on in the independence referendum, weare all clear that young people played an active part andtook their duty to vote extremely seriously, but I do notwant to add anything further to the reply given by myright hon. Friend the other day, because I think he dealtwith the matter definitively.
Philip Davies (Shipley) (Con): May we have a debate
on the extensive use of bail in the criminal justicesystem? Mr Waqar Akhtar was sentenced with threeco-accused to 17 years in prison for what the judgedescribed as a “despicable and inhuman plot” to abducta schoolteacher and rape her in a dark and lonelyBradford park. He was sentenced in his absence, however,having fled the country after giving evidence. Surely,somebody on trial for such a serious offence should bein custody during their trial and should not be allowedto escape the country. May we have a debate to stopsuch cases ever happening again?
Mr Hague: My hon. Friend is assiduous in raising
cases in which the operation of justice can be criticised,sometimes legitimately. He certainly raises an alarmingcase about which many hon. Members are likely to beconcerned. Although I cannot promise an immediatedebate, he will know that Justice questions will takeplace on 16 December, so he, in his usual energetic way,will be able to raise the matter with the Lord Chancellorand Secretary of State for Justice just as he has today.
Diana Johnson (Kingston upon Hull North) (Lab): In
Hull, parents with children seeking a diagnosis of autismare told that they have to wait 20 weeks for that diagnosis,but in reality it takes 14 to 15 months. May we have adebate on whether the new structures in the NHS areserving children and parents well?
Mr Hague: I cannot offer a debate on the subject, but
health matters are regularly discussed in the House, asthe hon. Lady knows. It is entirely right to raise suchmatters in questions to the Secretary of State for Healthor to press for debates on health matters from theBackbench Business Committee. I am sure that thereare many opportunities to raise these issues.431 432
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the HouseMr Speaker: Or in an Adjournment debate.
Simon Wright (Norwich South) (LD): Thousands of
young carers in Norfolk are at risk of falling behindtheir peers at school. May we have a debate on how bestto support the education of those children who care forfamily members at home, including perhaps throughthe extension of the pupil premium?
Mr Hague: This, like many of the issues raised already,
is important and will concern many people around thecountry. My hon. Friend might wish to take up all thenormal means of pursuing a debate. There is a CarersTrust reception in the Palace on 10 December that willhelp Members to understand these issues and to pursuethem.
Mrs Emma Lewell-Buck (South Shields) (Lab): The
credit union expansion project was supposed to help toprovide an alternative to payday lenders, yet creditunions are now reporting that the cost of the scheme isrising and their contributions are having to rise in linewith it. They are now questioning whether the scheme iseven viable. Will the Leader of the House ask hiscolleague, the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions,to come to the House to update Members on theprogress of the project before it becomes the latest in along line of DWP disasters?
Mr Hague: The hon. Lady will have every opportunity
to ask the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, ashe will be coming to the House on Monday for questions.It will be Treasury questions the next day, so I imaginethat there will be a good many opportunities to raisethese issues next week.
Guy Opperman (Hexham) (Con): May we have a
debate on air passenger duty following the autumnstatement and the Smith commission? My constituentswere delighted yesterday by the changes in the autumnstatement that mean that they will no longer have to pay£71 per child for under-12s, and for under-16s as we goforward. We need the regionalisation of APD for thenorthern airports, so that there is no problem withcompetition.
Mr Hague: Airports in the north of England are
benefiting from the decisions the Chancellor has madeon APD, as well as from the reductions to long-haulrates from April, the four-year freeze on the short-haulrates and the very important announcement in theautumn statement about the abolition of APD forchildren. Newcastle airport is eligible for support underthe regional air connectivity fund, which we have expanded.My right hon. Friend the Chancellor gave my hon.Friend a helpful reply yesterday, and I cannot add tothat at the moment.
Steve Rotheram (Liverpool, Walton) (Lab): Last week,
I attended a lobby of Parliament and a well-attendedmeeting in Parliament, which I chaired, on umbrellacompanies that use tax loopholes to rip off constructionworkers. The Chancellor specifically said in his statementyesterday that he will look at the use of umbrellacompanies. Will the Leader of the House find time inthe parliamentary timetable for a debate on this issue?Mr Hague: The Chancellor and the Treasury take
that issue very seriously. As the hon. Gentleman says,the Chancellor referred to it specifically yesterday; hefeels very strongly about it. As I have mentioned, as it isTreasury questions on Tuesday, that is the first andobvious opportunity to ask further questions of TreasuryMinisters, but the hon. Gentleman can be sure that theChancellor wants to deal with any abuses that arearising through these companies.
Mr Lee Scott (Ilford North) (Con): Following the
tragedy at the end of the Sri Lankan conflict, whenthousands of Tamil women and children were killed,may we have a debate on the progress being made, sincethe United Nations resolution earlier in the year, towardsan inquiry into what took place?
Mr Hague: There would be a good case for such a
debate. Terrible events took place at the end of thatconflict. The United Kingdom has pressed consistentlyfor the international inquiry; indeed, we won the vote inthe UN Human Rights Council earlier this year toestablish such an inquiry. We must now see what thatinquiry produces, but there is a good case for a debate inthe House and my hon. Friend might want to pursuethat through the Backbench Business Committee aswell as with Foreign Office Ministers.
Mr Frank Roy (Motherwell and Wishaw) (Lab): The
Leader of the House will be aware that earlier thisweek, the UN announced the end of the World FoodProgramme food voucher system for nearly 2 millionrefugees in Syria. Will he, or one of the Ministers, makea statement on the Government’s attitude to that seriousand tragic issue?
Mr Hague: These are very important issues. The scale
of the refugee crisis, particularly as it affects Lebanon,Jordan and Turkey, is extremely serious; I saw that formyself while serving as Foreign Secretary. I saw theimportance of the support in the form of food beinggiven to many of those refugees. This is, therefore, alegitimate concern for hon. Members and I will encouragethe Department for International Development to makeit clear to the House how we shall now proceed.
Dr Matthew Offord (Hendon) (Con): On Monday,
thousands of my constituents were put to greatinconvenience and uncertainty as the National Unionof Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers called yetanother strike on the Northern line. The case was aboutone individual failing a breath test. While I would notspeak about that specific case, may we have a debate onthe Floor of the House to look forward to legislating toprevent huge parts of this country from being held toransom by unions over specific issues?
Mr Hague: My hon. Friend speaks up very well for
his constituents, who should not be held to ransom inthat way; they should be able to go about their businesswithout such unnecessary and mindless disruption. Thereis a good case for such a debate, and I would encouragemy hon. Friend to seek that by all the usual methods.
Jim Fitzpatrick (Poplar and Limehouse) (Lab): In
December 2013, the groceries code adjudicator consultedon the level of fines she should be able to impose on433 434
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the House[Jim Fitzpatrick]
companies transgressing the codes and regulations
introduced by the Government—regulations that werewelcomed by British farming—but 12 months later, wehave yet to see the statutory instrument to enact the finethat she can introduce. Has the Leader of the Househad any indication from the Department for Business,Innovation and Skills when we might see the statutoryinstrument, and if not, may I prevail upon his goodoffices to inquire when we might see it?
Mr Hague: The right hon. Gentleman can prevail
upon my good offices. It is obviously important thatthese decisions are taken forward, so I will ask questionsof the Business Ministers, and ensure that they are intouch with the right hon. Gentleman to explain whatthe position is.
Alec Shelbrooke (Elmet and Rothwell) (Con): Mr Speaker,
you may have noticed the reports this morning that thisyear, the BBC at Christmas is showing more repeatsthan ever before. When I buy a DVD, I do not expect tokeep paying for it year on year. May we please havea debate on the BBC getting back to its remit in itscharter on public broadcasting, instead of lazily repeatingmore often than a hearty Christmas dinner?
Mr Hague: Initially, when I saw the headline about
the proportion of repeats, I thought it was talkingabout speeches by the shadow Chancellor, but it turnedout to be about Christmas shows on the BBC. I amsure—I hope—that those in the BBC have been listeningto what my hon. Friend says, so although I cannot offera debate, and in any case a debate before Christmaswould be unlikely to change the broadcasters’ Christmasschedules, I hope that they will be trying to give realquality to the public this Christmas season.
Nic Dakin (Scunthorpe) (Lab): Some 79% of dentists
lack confidence in the General Dental Council and areconcerned about its impact on dental services. Thisweekend 28 local dental committees will be meeting toconsider a vote of confidence in the General DentalCouncil. May we have a statement or a debate about theeffectiveness of the General Dental Council in relationto dentistry in the United Kingdom?
Mr Hague: I clearly cannot offer such a debate at
present, although the hon. Gentleman is well aware ofhow to pursue such a debate, and he can raise thematter at Health questions. I do not want to be drawninto a controversy within the dental profession in anycomment that I make now, but there clearly are someconcerns and the hon. Gentleman will be able to pursuethe matter in all the normal ways in the House.
Miss Anne McIntosh (Thirsk and Malton) (Con): I
support the points made about the groceries codeadjudicator. The only power she has is the power to levyfines. The fact that the statutory instrument has notbeen laid means that that important groceries code istoothless.
Mr Hague: None of us wants to see a groceries code
entirely toothless. There are clearly concerns on bothsides of the House about this, so, as I said when thematter was raised by the hon. Member for Poplar and
Limehouse (Jim Fitzpatrick), I will ask Business Ministersfor a report of progress on it.
Gemma Doyle (West Dunbartonshire) (Lab/Co-op):
The Glasgow office of the Centre for Radiation, Chemicaland Environmental Hazards is a UK facility that isfacing severe cuts and, I understand, possible closure,which would mean that the closest site was the onelocated in Leeds. Given the role of the centre in theevent of a nuclear incident or emergency, its currentproximity to the Clyde naval base, the home of thenuclear submarine fleet, is vital. May we have an urgentstatement on the matter, please?
Mr Hague: I cannot promise an urgent statement, but
the hon. Lady has raised the case powerfully, so I willrefer what she has said to the Ministers responsible sothat they can consider it and consider how to keep herand the House informed about the situation.
Mark Pawsey (Rugby) (Con): We heard in Transport
questions of the concern about congestion around schoolgates across the country. I recently joined pupils atBrownsover community school in Rugby outside in therain at going-home time to look at the careless parkingoutside the school by parents collecting their children.May we have a debate to consider measures to improveroad safety around school gates and to consider whatthe barriers are to parents allowing their children towalk or cycle to and from school?
Mr Hague: Road safety around schools is a very
important issue. My hon. Friend is right to raise it.Local authorities have a statutory responsibility to provideappropriate traffic management schemes, and they canput in place “school keep clear” markings, which arelegally enforceable, to prohibit parking on a designatedlength of highway, including near a school, to improveroad safety. I know that my hon. Friend will want tokeep pursuing the issue with Transport Ministers, andthey will be able to respond to him.
Kevin Brennan (Cardiff West) (Lab): May we debate
inequality? GDP per head in the poorest UK regions islower than in any region of France, Germany, Belgium,Luxembourg, Austria, Ireland, Sweden, Finland orDenmark, and nine out of 10 of the poorest regions innorthern Europe are in the UK. With real incomecontinuing to fall for the poorest, do the Governmentnot need to do more to favour the weakest over thewealthiest?
Mr Hague: What is actually happening, of course, is
that many more people are getting into work. As thehon. Gentleman knows, we have record levels ofemployment, and since 2010 there are 600,000 fewerpeople in relative poverty and 670,000 fewer worklesshouseholds than there were just four and a half yearsago. That is real progress in addressing poverty in thiscountry, and we can continue to address it only if wehave a growing economy and strong finances, which isthe basis of the statement that we heard yesterday.
Mr Peter Bone (Wellingborough) (Con): I had wanted
to ask the Leader of the House why money resolutionsfor two private Members’ Bills have not been laid,435 436
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the Housedespite the convention of the House, but there is a more
important matter: the debate on firefighters. May wehave a wider debate on firefighters so that I can offer mythanks to the firemen and women of Northamptonshire,who do such a great job, and to the Government fortheir very good record on firefighting?
Mr Hague: I am sure that in any debate on firefighters
my hon. Friend will be able to make that powerfulpoint about the strong performance of firefighters inNorthamptonshire, and indeed in so many parts of thecountry, and about the Government’s good record. Ifwe have such a debate, I will look forward to hearinghim make those points again.
Gordon Banks (Ochil and South Perthshire) (Lab):
May I begin by congratulating Alloa Athletic, whichlast night beat Rangers 3-2 and found a way to thechallenge cup final?
In 2010, I served as a Front-Bench spokesperson on
the Postal Services Bill, which paved the way for theprivatisation and sell-off of Royal Mail. I told the righthon. Member for Kingston and Surbiton (Mr Davey),who was leading for the Government at the time, that itwould lead to the ending of the current universal serviceobligation. We have now heard the chief executive of aprivatised Royal Mail predict just that. Will the Leaderof the House commit to a statement or a debate inGovernment time on ending that disgrace?
Mr Hague: I do not think that the chief executive
would necessarily agree with that interpretation of whathas been said, but I cannot speak for Royal Mail at all.The universal service is of course an important issue forhon. Members across the House and their constituents,and it will be wholly legitimate for the hon. Gentlemanto pursue that with Business Ministers and to seekdebates on the matter by all the normal methods.
Henry Smith (Crawley) (Con): The Foreign and
Commonwealth Office’s independent feasibility studyinto resettlement of the Chagos islands is due to bepublished early in the new year. May we please have adebate in January on the Floor of the House to ensurethat the matter is properly discussed?
Mr Hague: I am sure that the House will want to
discuss that in some way. Until we have seen the feasibilitystudy and the timing of its publication, we cannot makeany decisions on it. However, I take my hon. Friend’srequest as an early bid. I set up the feasibility studywhen I was Foreign Secretary and, like him, am lookingforward to seeing its results. We are committed toensuring that the review of any potential for resettlementis as transparent and inclusive as possible. I hope thatwill be welcomed by the many people of Chagossianheritage and origin who live in his constituency.
Julie Hilling (Bolton West) (Lab): The Chancellor
said yesterday:
“We have shown in this Parliament that we can deliver spending
reductions without damaging front-line public services”.—[ Official
Report , 3 December 2014; Vol. 589, c. 309.]
We need only look at the destruction of youth services,
the closure of Sure Start centres and the slashing ofsupport for disabled people, among so many otherthings, to see that that patently is not true, so may we
have a debate on the damage that this Government havedone to front-line services?
Mr Hague: I am sure that we will discuss the economy
and all the implications of Government policy a greatdeal, but the Chancellor pointed out yesterday thatwhen the shadow Chancellor complains and says thatthe deficit should be brought down even more quickly,Opposition Members always say that more should bespent on a whole range of items. It is not sustainable forthe Labour party to have it both ways: to criticise theGovernment on the deficit, yet to oppose every reductionin spending that makes it possible to control the deficit.The hon. Lady is falling into the same trap.
Tessa Munt (Wells) (LD): May we have some
parliamentary time to consider the disused railway linebetween Cheddar and Wells, which could provide amuch safer alternative for pedestrians and cyclists whocurrently have to use the very dangerous A371? All thepreparations have been done, involving hours of voluntarytime and slugs of taxpayers’ money, by way of countycouncil officers’ time, but the county council has preventedthe Strawberry Line campaign submitting its planningapplication because it says that funding for the path isnot in place. Will the Leader of the House encouragethe council to dust the application off, as it is shovel-readyand funding is available, but it is dependent on planningpermission?
Mr Hague: My hon. Friend has made her case. I do
not think that we in this House would be able to tell thecounty council what to do. She is clearly campaigningand putting forward her arguments on this issue, and nodoubt she will be able to discuss it further with thecounty council and others. I cannot offer her a debate,but I know she will continue to pursue the issue until itis resolved.
Kate Green (Stretford and Urmston) (Lab): May we
have a statement on the Government’s position onhumanist marriage? During the passage of the Marriage(Same Sex Couples) Act 2013, there was strong supportacross both Houses for the principle of humanist marriage,but there are now reports that the Government arereceiving spurious advice that it is not possible to proceedwith legal marriage on the basis of licensing a celebrantrather than premises. May we have a statement soonfrom the Government as to their intentions and theadvice that is being received by Ministers?
Mr Hague: Many people will be interested in this
issue. I cannot offer the hon. Lady an immediate statementor debate, but it is a long-running issue and a legitimatesubject for discussion, so I encourage her to keep pursuingit in all the normal ways. I will tell my ministerialcolleagues what she has said so that they can alsorespond to her.
Mr Henry Bellingham (North West Norfolk) (Con):
May I take the Leader of the House back to theFirefighters’ Pension Scheme (England) Regulations2014? I recently met a large delegation of firefightersfrom King’s Lynn who do a superb job in protecting ourcommunity. Does he agree that this subject warrants adebate on the Floor of the House, or at least a full437 438
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the House[Mr Henry Bellingham]
debate in Committee? I have written today to the relevant
Minister. Will the Leader of the House ensure that I geta quick reply, and will he support me in this quest?
Mr Hague: I am certainly always in favour of hon.
Members receiving quick replies from Ministers. Myhon. Friend is right to pay tribute to his local firefighters.I remind him that the reformed pension scheme forfirefighters remains one of the very best in the publicsector. As I said earlier, Lord Hutton found that thefirefighters pension scheme is the most expensive inthe public sector, and that has to be reformed. It will beimportant across the House to bear these points inmind.
Alison Seabeck (Plymouth, Moor View) (Lab): The
debate on the fishing industry will be welcomed byfishermen and fishing communities, and it is nothingless than they deserve. However, there are wider issues.For the past 18 months, I have questioned the accuracyand transparency of data that the Marine ManagementOrganisation is supplying to the Government, and thehon. and learned Member for Torridge and West Devon(Mr Cox) has called for an independent review. There isa wider issue about the importance of accuracy andtransparency of data across Departments, because clearlyGovernment decisions on investment depend on accuratedata. May we find time for a debate on the collection ofdata for Government?
Mr Hague: As the hon. Lady acknowledges, a debate
on the specifics of the fishing industry will take place aweek today. That is a general debate, so if she is able tocatch your eye, Mr Speaker, she will be able to makethose points in so far as they relate to the fishingindustry. I cannot offer a wider debate on data collection.She can make her case to the Backbench BusinessCommittee, but the Government do not currently haveany time to allocate to the subject.
Mr Andrew Robathan (South Leicestershire) (Con):
My right hon. Friend will recall that the previousGovernment, in their desperation to appease the IRA,brought forward measures to give Sinn Fein MPs, whodo not recognise this House, do not play any part in thisHouse and do not look after their constituents inthis House, all the privileges, allowances and pay of thisHouse. Will he now make time for the House to revisitthat decision and ensure that people who do not recognisethis House should not be rewarded for not being here?
Mr Hague: As the House knows, it is established in
legislation that only MPs who choose to take their seatsby swearing the Oath are eligible for an actual salary ofa Member of Parliament, and I do not detect anyappetite for a change in those arrangements. Sinn FeinMembers do not qualify for Short money either, as theyhave not taken their seats and therefore cannot participatein parliamentary business. Since 2001—the House passeda resolution on this in 2006—they have been able toclaim some expenses in relation to what is calledrepresentative business. It would be a matter for theHouse to change that, or not to change it, in future. Myright hon. Friend has made his point very well.Andrew Gwynne (Denton and Reddish) (Lab): About
15 years ago, Langtree Group purchased the OldhamBatteries site in the centre of Denton. It demolished thebuildings and promised a large-scale urban regenerationscheme based on retail and leisure. Since then, it hasdone nothing and left the site to rot. Could we have astatement from the Secretary of State for Communitiesand Local Government on what the Government intendto do to clamp down on land banking so that nocommunity in the future faces the uncertainty, derelictionand blight that Langtree has left us in Denton?
Mr Hague: No community wishes to suffer dereliction
and blight, and I absolutely understand that this is animportant issue for the hon. Gentleman’s constituents.There will be questions to the Secretary of State forCommunities and Local Government on 15 December—in11 days’ time—so I encourage the hon. Gentleman toraise the issue directly with DCLG Ministers on thatoccasion.
Andrew Stephenson (Pendle) (Con): Following the
autumn statement, could we have a debate onmanufacturing? We heard yesterday that manufacturingis growing faster than any other sector of the economy,and manufacturing is doing particularly well in Pendle,with a number of major employers expanding at present.We have also seen 3,810 new apprenticeship starts since2010 and unemployment has now fallen 52% since itspeak in August 2009, so could we have a debate onmanufacturing and the Government’s long-term economicplan?
Mr Hague: I hope those issues will feature in all our
debates and discussions about economic matters and inquestions to Treasury Ministers next week. My hon.Friend points to some very important trends and hugeimprovements in economic performance around thecountry, including in his constituency. I know fromvisiting his constituency what a strong advocate he is forlocal businesses, apprenticeships and employment in hisarea, and his constituents benefit greatly from his work.
Richard Fuller (Bedford) (Con): The change in how
V AT is charged on digital products, which is due on1 January, is causing sole traders and small businessesgreat concern, as it will impose on them new, onerousrecord-keeping requirements, data protection and othercosts, and potential exposure to unanticipated HMRCliabilities. Could we have a statement from the Secretaryof State for Business, Innovation and Skills so that hecan explain why he will not use his discretion to exemptsmall payments or uphold the V AT threshold for digitalproducts, and to reassure us that he is not unnecessarilydamaging our digital micro-businesses?
Mr Hague: I cannot promise an immediate statement,
but my hon. Friend is clearly concerned about theimplications in a few weeks’ time, so I shall draw hispoint to the attention of Ministers at the Departmentfor Business, Innovation and Skills and ask them torespond to him directly.
Andrew Jones (Harrogate and Knaresborough) (Con):
One of the most significant elements of the autumnstatement was the progress on the northern powerhouse,covering many different policy areas, infrastructure439 440
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the Houseinvestment, support for the economy in terms of exports,
manufacturing and skills, and the devolution of decisionmaking and budgets. That is very good news, but wehave not yet had the chance to debate it, so please maywe?
Mr Hague: I hope there will be many opportunities to
do so, although the Opposition are not very good atchoosing the economy for Opposition day debates. Itdoes not happen very often. There will be Treasuryquestions on Tuesday. My hon. Friend is right to saythat the further announcements about the northernpowerhouse, including in particular the improvementsin rail services across the north of England and theproposals for a new advanced material science centre inand a new sovereign wealth fund for the north ofEngland, are all major proposals. They add up to thestrongest platform for the north of England that anyGovernment in modern times have presented, and Ihope we will have many opportunities to debate it.
Rehman Chishti (Gillingham and Rainham) (Con):
Recently my constituent Tommy Willan was namedregional trainee of the year for 2014 for his hard workduring his electrical apprenticeship, organised by JTL,which has also arranged 31,000 extra apprenticeshipsaround the country. Will the Leader of the House allowa debate on the excellent work the Government aredoing on apprenticeships around the country, equippingour young people with the skills to succeed in life?
Mr Hague: I join in congratulating my hon. Friend’s
constituent on his award, which I am sure was very welldeserved. Although we will not be able to accommodatea separate debate on every aspect of the economy, adebate on this subject would be extremely welcome andwould help to highlight the positive effects the 1.9 millionapprenticeships starts in the past four and a half yearshave had on our economy since the election. Of course,many of us hope it will be possible to go on in the nextParliament to have 3 million apprenticeships and toabolish youth unemployment entirely, and that is whatthe Chancellor is setting out to do.
Mr Philip Hollobone (Kettering) (Con): We now pay
more than £10 billion a year as our annual membershipfee to the European Union, and we have recently receiveda demand for £1.7 billion more; yet the UK’s tradedeficit with the EU is increasing at an alarming rate.The Government’s own figures, released this week, showthat our trade deficit with the EU was £28.5 billion in2010, as much as £56.2 billion in 2013, and already£25.5 billion in the first half of 2014. May we have adebate on the Floor of the House, opened by the
Business Secretary and closed by the Foreign Secretary,in which we demolish the myth that 3 million jobs inthis country are dependent on our membership of theEuropean Union? The figures prove that they are not.
Mr Hague: Our trade with all parts of the world,
including Europe, is an extremely important issue. Giventhe poor performance of the eurozone and the flatnessof our export markets in Europe, which is driving someof the figures that my hon. Friend cites, the proportionof Britain’s exports going outside the European Unionhas increased in recent times. There have been particularlysharp increases in our exports to countries in the fareast and to some countries in Latin America. It is vitalto continue that, and to improve our export performanceoverall. That is why the Chancellor yesterday announcedfurther resources for the Foreign Office and UK Trade& Investment to do that. This is one of the importantissues to discuss in all our debates on yesterday’s autumnstatement.
Robert Halfon (Harlow) (Con): As we approach small
business Saturday, may we have a statement on whitevan woman? Under this Government, more womenthan ever are in employment, 20% of small businessesare now run by women compared with 14% under theprevious Government, and the majority—55%—ofapprenticeship starters are now female. Given thosefigures, is it not correct that this Government are thetrue Government of white van woman, and may welook at what further help can be given?
Mr Hague: Yes, absolutely. We do not know where
the former shadow Attorney-General, the hon. Memberfor Islington South and Finsbury (Emily Thornberry),is at the moment, but she might be in training to be awhite van woman after what happened a couple ofweeks ago.
My hon. Friend has coined an important new phrase.
It is very important that we continue our progress inmaking sure that women participate fully in our economy,and that is happening under this Government. Thegender pay gap for those under the age of 40 has beenclosed for the first time. There are now women on theboards of all the FTSE 100 companies, which wascertainly not the case when the previous Governmentwere in power. I think that white van woman must alsoplay her part, and the measures announced yesterday—tosupport small businesses, encourage enterprise, and helppeople who work hard and try to get on in life—will bevery supportive of white van woman.441 442
4 DECEMBER 2014 Business of the House Business of the HousePensions and Benefits Uprating
11.28 am
The Minister for Pensions (Steve Webb): With permission,
Mr Speaker, I should like to make a statement about theuprating of pensions and social security benefits for2015-16. I shall place in the Library full details of thenew rates that are due to come into force from the weekof 6 April 2015 for each pension and benefit. As part ofhis autumn statement yesterday, my right hon. Friendthe Chancellor announced the rates of tax credits for2015-16. Today, I shall announce the uprating of thepensions and social security benefits for which myDepartment is responsible.
The coalition Government continue to stand by our
promise for those who have worked hard all their lives.We shall honour our commitment to the triple lock toincrease the basic state pension by the greatest of earnings,prices or 2.5%. I can therefore confirm that the basicstate pension for 2015-16 will increase by the value ofthe third element of the triple lock, 2.5%. Even at a timewhen earnings growth remains constrained, we will notrepeat the mistakes of the past, such as the 75p rise in2000.
From April 2015, the new basic state pension for a
single person will be £115.95 a week, which is up by£2.85 a week, and we estimate that the basic statepension will be around 18% of average earnings—itshighest comparative level for more than two decades.Thanks to the coalition commitment to the triple lock,a person on the full basic state pension will receivearound £560 a year more in 2015-16 than if it had beenuprated only by earnings during this Parliament. Thatcommitment means that since coming to office, thecoalition has increased the basic state pension by around£950 a year.
Let me turn to additional state pensions, which are
often referred to as SERPS—state earnings-related pensionschemes. Unlike the Labour party, which froze SERPSin 2010, the coalition has uprated them by the full valueof the consumer prices index since 2011, and they willrise again by the full value of the CPI for 2015-16. Forpension credit the statutory increase for the standardminimum guarantee is in line with average earnings,which on this occasion would mean an increase of just0.6%. If left at that, pensioners on the lowest incomeswould receive an increase of less than £1 a week, whichwe believe would be unacceptable. I am therefore pleasedto announce that we shall over-index the standard minimumguarantee so that the increase for our poorest pensioners—those with least opportunity to increase their income inlater life—will be in line with the cash value for the basicstate pension.
From next year, the single person rate of the guarantee
credit will rise by £2.85, which means that income fromthat safety net benefit will be worth £151.20 a week. Forcouples the increase will be £4.35, taking the new totalto £230.85 a week. Of course, I look forward to a worldwhere the new state pension is in payment, which willsignificantly reduce the number of people in the scopeof means-tested pension top-ups.
As in previous years, resources needed to pay the
above-earnings increase to the standard minimum guaranteewill be found by increasing the savings credit threshold,meaning that those with higher levels of income maysee less of an increase than they would otherwise have
done. Measures in the Welfare Benefits Up-rating Act2013 commit the Government to a 1% increase in themain rates of working-age benefits again this year,which includes jobseeker’s allowance, income support,and universal credit, as well as the main rate andwork-related activity component of employment andsupport allowance. Those tough but important decisionswere taken in the face of the ongoing challenge to ournational economy, and debated during the passage ofthat Act.
This year, the coalition will again ensure that those
who face additional costs because of their disability andhave less opportunity to increase their income throughpaid employment, will see their benefits increase by thefull value of the CPI. Personal independence payment,disability living allowance, attendance allowance, carer’sallowance and incapacity benefit will rise by the statutoryminimum of 1.2% from April 2015, as will the ESAsupport group component and those disability-relatedpremiums that are paid with pension credit and working-age benefits.
At a time when the nation’s finances remain under
pressure, the Government will spend £2.5 billion extrain 2015-16. Around £2 billion, or 80% of the money,will be spent on state pensions, around £300 million willbe spent on disabled people and their carers—we haveover-indexed the earnings threshold for the carer’s allowancethis year—and nearly £200 million will be spent onpeople who are unable to work because of sickness orunemployment.
The ongoing commitment to pensioners means that
we have increased the state pension by around £950during the course of this Parliament, which is £560more than if we had uprated it by earnings alone. Wehave committed to spending £10 billion more on thebasic state pension over this Parliament than wouldhave been the case without our commitment to thetriple lock, and we have protected our poorest pensionerswith the over-indexation of the standard minimumguarantee, so that they too benefit from the triple lock.We have continued to ensure that benefits that cover theadditional costs of disability maintain their value in linewith the CPI. I have outlined the Government’s sustainedcommitment to ensuring that even in these difficulttimes, no one is left behind, and I commend this statementto the House.
11.33 am
Gregg McClymont (Cumbernauld, Kilsyth and
Kirkintilloch East) (Lab): Every year the Minister comesto the House and declares to what is supposed to be agrateful nation that the wisdom and generosity of theGovernment is reflected in the uprating of pensions andbenefits. Sadly, the reality is rather different. The Ministersaid at the end of his statement that “no one is leftbehind”, and he rushed through the Government’s changesto working-age benefits. How do those who are workingor looking for work feel about the fact that the benefitsthey rely on are being raised by only 1%? It is the priceof economic failure. Those individuals are the sameindividuals who are suffering the consequences of thehated and ludicrous bedroom tax. Let us get this incontext: the Government are not treating people equally.The statement makes that clear.443 444
4 DECEMBER 2014 Pensions and Benefits UpratingSome £25 billion extra has been spent on social
security since 2010 because of the Government’s failures.In the end, Government spending on the most vulnerablein our society—pensioners, those looking for work andthose who rely on other benefits—depends on how theeconomy is performing. The Government have borrowed£219 billion more than they predicted they would in2010. Is it any surprise that those in need are not seeingthe benefit?
May I pick the Minister up on his wonderful use of
the term “over-indexing”? In the context in which heuses the term, “over-indexing”means simply that earningsgrowth has been so weak and paltry under the Governmentthat, to ensure that those relying on benefits that wouldhave been uprated by average earnings have some sortof reasonable increase, he is forced to increase benefitsby a measure other than average earnings. That was anOrwellian use of the term “over-indexing”.
Let us put the statement in context. The Government
expect the nation to be grateful for their generous andmunificent benefits uprating, but they are working withina narrow economic framework imposed by their ownpolicies. People who depend on help to get into workand help to make ends meet will not be grateful for thepaltry increases.
Interestingly, universal credit is included in working-age
benefits in the statement. The Chancellor claimed yesterdaythat the welfare cap will be met, but is that because ofthe excessive delays in the introduction of universalcredit rather than because the Government have got togrips with the underlying drivers of welfare spending—highrents drive up costs and low pay drives up tax creditclaims? The welfare cap is related fundamentally, amongother things, to the progress of universal credit. Will theMinister comment on that?
The context of the statement is that the Government
have been forced to borrow much more than theybelieved they would have to borrow. Their failing economicpolicy means that those in most need are paying theprice. The Minister trumpets the increases to pensionerbenefits and the state pension, but let us not forget—[Interruption.] From a sedentary position, the Minister
says, “Questions.” The question is this: why has hiseconomic plan failed so badly that those who dependon help from the Government are not getting it?
The context is clear: the Government’s economic
plan has failed, Government borrowing is so muchhigher than they expected, and, in the end, those whopay the price are those most in need.
Steve Webb: The House is not clear whether the hon.
Gentleman is saying that we should spend more or lesson welfare. As far as I could tell, he was arguing forboth at the same time.
The hon. Gentleman referred to a failed economic
policy. Is that an economy that is growing faster thanany other developed economy in the western world,and an economy in which unemployment has fallen for24 consecutive months? If that is failure, I am not surewhat success looks like.
The hon. Gentleman asked about getting to grips
with underlying economic issues. Worklessness is, ofcourse, the most fundamental underlying economicproblem, and worklessness is down substantially on2010. Unemployment is down. Full-time and part-timework are up. Those are the things that helped us to
announce yesterday that welfare spending is lower thanhad previously been forecast.
The hon. Gentleman mocked the term “over-indexing”,
which means putting something up by more than one islegally obliged to. We have done that for the poorestpensioners. I am not sure whether he opposes or supportsthat, but I can tell the House one thing: we have lookedat what the Opposition would have done had they beenin our position and had put the state pension up in linewith their announced policy. We assume their policywould have been RPI until 2012 and earnings thereafter,as that is what their manifesto said. We have discoveredthat had Labour been in office the state pension wouldnow be £7 a week lower than the coalition is paying. Ido not think we have any questions to answer from theOpposition.
Alistair Burt (North East Bedfordshire) (Con): As a
former Minister for people with disabilities, I welcomethe protection given to the benefits that my right hon.Friend has announced this morning. It is an objectlesson in the fact that it is only a strong economy thatcan provide that degree of protection, in stark contrastto what we saw before. Will he say from the DispatchBox whether is he confident that the degree of protectionoffered by the Chancellor is likely to continue in thefuture if the Government are returned in due course?
Steve Webb: I am grateful to my right hon. Friend.
He is right that our ability to afford the substantialincreases in the state pension in particular depends on asound economic strategy. He will know that what wehave been seeking to do is make sure that we have botha strong economy and a fair society, as delivered throughthis statement today. In terms of what happens post-2015,my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has indicatedthat he wants to see the triple lock continued and Icertainly want to see it continued. Indeed, I would liketo see it as the law of the land after the next election.
Mr Alan Reid (Argyll and Bute) (LD): I congratulate
my right hon. Friend on his statement and on thetremendous work he has done over the past four and ahalf years after inheriting economic disaster from theLabour party. Will he confirm that the rise in the statepension next year will be more than double the rate ofinflation as measured at the end of September as normal?
Steve Webb: Indeed. Those who follow our proceedings
will note that we have had two consecutive questionsfrom Government Members, because not a single LabourBack Bencher has any views on this subject. My hon.Friend is right. The increase of 2.5% is double the rateof inflation and quadruple our statutory duty to increasein line with earnings. Four times the statutory minimumseems like a fair deal to me.
Robert Halfon (Harlow) (Con): I welcome the statement.
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the Governmenthave a relentless focus on helping poorer pensioners?Contrary to what was said by the shadow Minister, thesingle room supplement does not apply to pensioners.Does he also agree that the poorer pensioners in myconstituency will be on average roughly £800 better offthanks to this Government’s polices and help on pensions?445 446
4 DECEMBER 2014 Pensions and Benefits Uprating Pensions and Benefits UpratingSteve Webb: Yes, my hon. Friend is right that the
measures we have applied to those with spare rooms insocial housing do not apply to pensioners. We havespecifically prioritised the poorest pensioners. Underthe law, the link to earnings would have meant relativelysmall cash increases. We did not feel that a rise of lessthan £1 a week was acceptable and that is why we havepassed through the full value of the cash increase in thebasic state pension to the poorest pensioners—thoseonly on the guaranteed credit.
Richard Graham (Gloucester) (Con): I absolutely
welcome what the Minister has had to say about theincrease in the basic state pension: £950 more than in2010 is a remarkable achievement by the Government.As he points out, it is £7 a week more than Labourpolicy would have paid.
In terms of some of the other remarkable comments
made by the shadow Minister, the Minister might beinterested to know that I was in Hammersmith JobcentrePlus this morning. Paul, who has worked in benefits for27 years, told me that this is the real deal. Dawn, whoworks there, says that what is happening is a revolution—itis the best thing happening. Does the Minister agreethat there is a wonderful opportunity for the shadowMinister and all four of his Back-Bench colleaguespresent to visit Hammersmith Jobcentre Plus and learnfor themselves what universal credit is doing for thecountry?
Steve Webb: My hon. Friend is highly expert in
these matters, and he will know that the Hammersmithjobcentre has become something of a tourist attractionin demonstrating the excellence of universal credit.What is so exciting is that in previous years we wouldtalk about something hypothetical, whereas now we aretalking about something real that thousands of peopleare already receiving. We are rolling it out more extensivelyas the months and years go by. It is a very profoundchange in our welfare state—one that we can all beproud of.
Steve McCabe (Birmingham, Selly Oak) (Lab) rose—
Mr Speaker: Order. The hon. Gentleman did not
appear to be in the Chamber at the start of the statement.Was he present then?
Steve McCabe: I think I was 25 seconds late, Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker: If the hon. Gentleman was not in the
Chamber at the start of the statement, it is not seemlyfor him to seek to participate. I would not want him tobehave in an unseemly manner—wittingly or unwittingly.I am in a sense saving the hon. Gentleman from himselfin saying that he should not participate on this occasion.We will store him up and look forward to his words ofwisdom subsequently.
Ian Swales (Redcar) (LD): I congratulate my right
hon. Friend on today’s pension announcement and ongetting the Liberal Democrat policy of a triple lockincrease into this Government’s programme. Does heagree that with a safety net of 2.5%, the minimumpension increase that people can look forward to in thefuture is nearly £3 a week and that they will have nomore insulting 75p a week increases?Steve Webb: My hon. Friend is quite right that when
the previous Government paid 75p, they were sufficientlyembarrassed that they had to put the pension up by£5 the following year—almost to apologise. That is noway to treat pensioners. My hon. Friend is right aboutthe triple lock, too. This morning, I did one of the manyradio phone-ins I have been doing, and people havebeen asking me why the pension is not more. I pointedout that we had 30 years of decline to reverse fromwhen the earnings link was broken in 1980 through to2010, and that we are now starting to restore the realvalue of the pension to give pensioners some dignityand security.
Mr Philip Hollobone (Kettering) (Con): There was so
much good news in the Minister’s statement that I wasstruggling to write it all down. So that I get it right formy Kettering constituents, will he confirm that what hehas just announced is a 2.5% increase in the basic statepension, which is equivalent to an increase of £2.85 aweek for a single person; that the basic state pension isnow 18% of average earnings, the highest comparativelevel for 20 years; and that since the start of thisParliament, pensions have gone up by £950 a year,which is £560 a year more than if they had simply beenincreased in line with inflation?
Steve Webb: Indeed. My hon. Friend obviously writes
very quickly, and he was correct in every particular. Theincrease in the pension rate for a single person is £2.85 aweek and it is £4.55 a week for those on what we looselycall the couples rate. I can confirm that all the figures hegave were correct.
Henry Smith (Crawley) (Con): Pensioners in Crawley
will very much welcome what is a generous and fairincrease in the state pension. What is my hon. Friend’sobservation on the fact that barely more than half adozen Labour Members have attended this statement,particularly given the fact that this is clearly good newsfor pensioners up and down the country?
Steve Webb: My hon. Friend puts his finger on it. The
Opposition have struggled to find anything to criticisein the statement. So few of them have turned up becauseit is a positive measure both for pensioners and forvulnerable people in our society.
Roger Williams (Brecon and Radnorshire) (LD): I,
too, congratulate my right hon. Friend on his statement,which will be warmly received by pensioners in myconstituency and throughout the country. Some timeago, my right hon. Friend was kind enough to meetrepresentatives of the community from Coelbren, whowere concerned that they rarely qualified for the severeweather payment. The Minister explained that it wasdue to the postcode, but I think he realised that qualifyingfor that payment was a fairly rough and ready matter.Has he been able to reflect further on that, and can Igive the people of Coelbren some good news?
Steve Webb: I well remember our meeting, poring
over maps of the Welsh valleys with my hon. Friend andhis constituents. As he knows, the trigger for the coldweather payment of £25 a week—let me confirm thatwe are retaining that payment, not the cut to £8.50 aweek that Labour had planned—is linked to postcode447 448
4 DECEMBER 2014 Pensions and Benefits Uprating Pensions and Benefits Upratingsectors. We use just under 100 of those. We review the
scheme each year, and where there are fresh representationsfrom hon. Members, we look at them afresh. Althoughthe system is up and running for this year, if my hon.Friend wanted to make further representations, we wouldof course continue to look at them.Stamp Duty Land Tax
Mr Speaker: I call the Minister to move the motion.
Is the Minister not present? [H ON.M EMBERS : “No.”]
In that case, I call the Minister for Pensions to move themotion.
Motion made, and Question proposed,
That, pursuant to section 5 of the Provisional Collection of
Taxes Act 1968, provisional statutory effect shall be given to thefollowing motion:
Stamp duty land tax (residential property transactions)That—
(1) Part 4 of the Finance Act 2003 (stamp duty land tax) is
amended as follows.
(2) Section 55 (general rules on calculating the amount of stamp
duty land tax chargeable) is amended as follows.
(3) In subsection (1) for “a percentage of the chargeable consideration
for the transaction” substitute “determined in accordance withsubsections (IB), (1C) and (2)”.
(4) After subsection (1A) insert—“(IB) If the relevant land consists entirely of residential property
and the transaction is not one of a number of linked transactions,the amount of tax chargeable is determined as follows—
Step 1Apply the rates specified in the second column of Table A below
to the parts of the relevant consideration specified in the firstcolumn of that Table.
Step 2Add together the amounts calculated at Step 1 (if there are two or
more such amounts).
Table A: Residential
Part of relevant consideration Rate
So much as does not exceed £125,000 0%
So much as exceeds £125,000 but does
not exceed £250,0002%
So much as exceeds £250,000 but does
not exceed £925,0005%
So much as exceeds £250,000 but does
not exceed £925,00010%
The remainder (if any) 12%
(1C) If the relevant land consists entirely of residential property
and the transaction is one of a number of linked transactions, theamount of tax chargeable in respect of the particular transactionunder consideration is determined as follows—
Step 1Apply the rates specified in the second column of Table A in
subsection (IB) to the parts of the relevant consideration specifiedin the first column of that Table.
Step 2Add together the amounts calculated at Step 1 (if there are two or
more such amounts).
Step 3Multiply the amount given by Step 1 or Step 2, as the case may be,
by—
  C
R
where—
C is the chargeable consideration for the transaction, andR is the relevant consideration.”
(5) In subsection (2) for the words from the beginning of that
subsection to the end of Table A substitute—449 450 4 DECEMBER 2014 Pensions and Benefits Uprating“If the relevant land consists of or includes land that is not
residential property, the amount of tax chargeable is the percentageof the chargeable consideration for the transaction determined inaccordance with Table B below by reference to the amount of therelevant consideration.”
(6) In subsection (3) for “subsection (2)”substitute “subsections (IB)
and (2)”.
(7) In subsection (4) at the beginning insert “For the purposes of
subsections (1C) and (2),”.
(8) Omit subsection (7).(9) Section 74 (exercise of collective rights by tenants of flats) is
amended as follows.
(10) In subsection (1A)—(a) in the opening words, for “rate” substitute “amount”,(b) in Step 2—(i) for “rate of tax and the” substitute “amount of’, and(ii) for “subsections (2) and (3)” substitute “subsection (IB)”,(c) in Step 3—(i) for “rate of tax and the” substitute “amount of”, and(ii) for “subsections (2) and (3)” substitute “subsection (IB)”, and(d) in Step 4 for “subsections (2) and (3) do” substitute “subsection
(IB) does”.
(11) For subsections (2) and (3) substitute—
“(IB) Where step 2 or 3 of subsection (1A) requires the amount
of tax chargeable to be determined in accordance with thissubsection, it is determined as follows.
Step 1Determine the amount of tax chargeable under section 55 as if
the relevant consideration for the chargeable transaction were thefraction of the relevant consideration calculated under step 1 ofsubsection (1A).
Step 2Multiply the amount determined at step 1 by the number of
qualifying flats contained in the premises.”
(12) In section 75 (crofting community right to buy) for subsections (2)
and (3) substitute—
“(1A) In that case, the amount of tax is determined as follows—Step 1
Determine the amount of tax chargeable under section 55 as if
the relevant consideration for the chargeable transaction were thefraction of the relevant consideration produced by dividing thetotal amount of that consideration by the number of crofts beingbought.
Step 2Multiply the amount determined at step 1 by the number of crofts
being bought under that transaction.”
(13) In section 77(l)(b) (notifiable transactions) for “which tax is
chargeable at a rate of 1 % or higher” substitute “any part ofwhich tax is chargeable at a rate of more than 0%”.
(14) In section 77A(2)(a) (notifiable transactions: exception of
certain acquisitions of major interests in land: interpretation) for“1% or higher” substitute “more than 0%”.
(15) In section 80(2) (requirement to make return where contingency
ceases, or consideration is ascertained, and tax or additional tax ispayable etc)—
(a) in the opening words, after “before” insert “(calculated in
either case according to the effective date of the transaction)”,and
(b) omit paragraph (c), but not the “and” at the end.(16) In section 80(4) (cases where less tax payable) after “in
respect of a transaction” insert “(calculated according to itseffective date)”.(17) In section 81ZA(l)(c) (alternative finance arrangements: additional
tax where reliefs withdrawn to be calculated by reference toeffective date) for “by reference to the rates in force at” substitute“according to”.
(18) In section 81A(1) (requirement to make return in consequence
of later linked transactions where tax or additional tax is payableetc)—
(a) in the opening words, after “before” insert “(calculated in
either case according to the effective date of the earlier transaction)”,and
(b) omit paragraph (c), but not the “and” at the end.(19) In section 109(2)(b) (general power to vary Part 4 of the 2003
Act: power to alter descriptions of transaction chargeable at anyexisting rate or amount) after “amount” insert “, or in respect ofwhich tax is calculated in accordance with any particular provision”.
(20) In section 122 omit the entry for “rate of tax”.(21) In paragraph 3(l)(b) of Schedule 4A (certain high-value
transactions not linked to other transactions for purposes ofsection 55(4)) for “55(4)” substitute “55(1B), (1C) and (4)”.
(22) Schedule 6B (transfers involving multiple dwellings) is amended
as follows.
(23) For paragraph 4(1) substitute—“(1) If relief under this Schedule is claimed for a relevant transaction,
the amount of tax chargeable in respect of the transaction is thesum of—
(a) the tax related to the consideration attributable to dwellings
(see paragraph 5(1) and (2)), and
(b) the tax related to the remaining consideration (if any) (see
paragraph 5(7)).”
(24) Omit paragraph 4(4).(25) For the italic heading before paragraph 5 substitute “The
amount of tax chargeable”.
(26) For paragraph 5(1) and (2) substitute—“(1) For the purposes of paragraph 4(l)(a), “the tax related to the
consideration attributable to dwellings” is determined as follows—
Step 1Determine the amount of tax that would be chargeable under
section 55 on the assumption that—
(a) the relevant land consisted entirely of residential property, and(b) the relevant consideration were the fraction produced by
dividing total dwellings consideration by total dwellings.
Step 2Multiply the amount determined at Step 1 by total dwellings.Step 3If the relevant transaction is one of a number of linked transactions,
go to Step 4.
Otherwise, the amount found at Step 2 is the tax related to the
consideration attributable to dwellings.
Step 4Multiply the amount found at Step 2 by—
  CD
TDC
where—
“CD” is the consideration attributable to dwellings for the
relevant transaction, and “TDC” is total dwellings consideration.
(2) But if the amount found at Step 2 of sub-paragraph (1) is less
than 1% of total dwellings consideration, for the purposes ofparagraph 4(l)(a) “the tax related to the consideration attributableto dwellings” is an amount equal to 1% of the considerationattributable to dwellings.”
(27) For paragraph 5(7) substitute—“(7) For the purposes of paragraph 4(l)(b), “the tax related to the
remaining consideration”is the appropriate fraction of the amountof tax which (but for this Schedule) would be due in respect of therelevant transaction.451 452 4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax(8) In subsection (7) “the appropriate fraction” means—
  RC
TDC  TRC +
where—
“RC”is the remaining consideration for the relevant transaction,
“TDC” is total dwellings consideration, and“TRC” is total remaining consideration.
(9) For a transaction that is not one of a number of linked
transactions, “total remaining consideration” is the remainingconsideration for that transaction (see paragraph 4(3)).
(10) For one of a number of linked transactions, “total remaining
consideration” is—
(a) the total of the chargeable consideration for all those transactions,
less
(b) total dwellings consideration.”(28) In paragraph 6(1) (change of circumstances after relief
given) for paragraph (c) substitute—
“(c) had the event occurred immediately before the effective date
of the transaction, more tax (calculated according to the effectivedate of the transaction) would have been payable, whether becausethe transaction would not have been a relevant transaction orotherwise.”
(29) In paragraph 6(3) (requirement to make return where more
tax payable than was paid) omit paragraph (c), but not the “and”at the end.
(30) In paragraph 8(1) of Schedule 7 (acquisition relief)—(a) for “rate” substitute “amount”, and(b) for “0.5%” substitute “an amount equal to 0.5% of the
chargeable consideration for the transaction”.
(31) In paragraph 4B(1) of Schedule 9 (shared ownership transactions)
for “rate” substitute “amount”.
(32) In paragraph 12 of Schedule 9 (shared ownership trusts) for
“rate” substitute “amount”.
(33) In paragraph 30(2) of Schedule 15 (partnerships) in paragraph
(a) for “rate of tax chargeable under that section is 1% or higher”substitute “amount of tax chargeable under that section is notzero”.
(34) In paragraph 3(3) of Schedule 17A (leases that continue after
a fixed term: additional tax to be calculated by reference toeffective date)—
(a) in the opening words, after “before” insert “(calculated in
either case according to the effective date of the transaction)”,and
(b) omit paragraph (c), but not the “and” at the end.(35) In paragraph 4(3) of Schedule 17A (treatment of leases for
indefinite term: additional tax to be calculated by reference toeffective date)—
(a) in the opening words, after “before” insert “(calculated in
either case according to the effective date of the transaction)”,and
(b) omit paragraph (c), but not the “and” at the end.(36) In paragraph 7(1) of Schedule 19 (old linked transactions
relevant to rate of tax) for “rate” substitute “amount”.
(37) In paragraph 9(4) of Schedule 19 (exercise of option or right
of pre-emption acquired before implementation date) for “rate”substitute “amount”.
(38) In consequence of amendments made by preceding provisions
of this Resolution—
(a) in the Finance Act 2006, omit section 162(1),(b) in the Finance Act 2010, omit section 7(1), and(c) in the Finance Act 2012—(d) omit section 213(1), and(e) in Schedule 35, omit paragraphs 2(4) and (6) and 5(3).(39) The amendments made by this Resolution have effect in
relation to any land transaction of which the effective date is, or isafter, 4 December 2014.
(40) But those amendments do not have effect in relation to a
transaction if the purchaser so elects and either—
(a) the transaction is effected in pursuance of a contract entered
into and substantially performed before 4 December 2014, or
(b) the transaction is effected in pursuance of a contract entered
into before that date and is not excluded by paragraph (42).
(41) An election under paragraph (40)—(a) must be included in the land transaction return made in
respect of the transaction or in an amendment of that return, and
(b) must comply with any requirements specified by the Commissioners
for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs as to its form or themanner of its inclusion.
(42) A transaction effected in pursuance of a contract entered
into before 4 December 2014 is excluded by this paragraph if—
(a) there is any variation of the contract, or assignment (or
assignation) of rights under the contract, on or after 4 December2014,
(b) the transaction is effected in consequence of the exercise on or
after that date of any option, right of pre-emption or similarright, or
(c) on or after that date there is an assignment (or assignation),
subsale or other transaction relating to the whole or part of thesubject-matter of the contract as a result of which a person otherthan the purchaser under the contract becomes entitled to call fora conveyance.
(43) In paragraphs (40) to (42)—“land transaction return”, in relation to a transaction, means the
return under section 76 of the Finance Act 2003 in respect of thattransaction;
“purchaser” has the same meaning as in Part 4 of that Act (see
section 43(4) of that Act);
“substantially performed”, in relation to a contract, has the same
meaning as in that Part (see section 44(5) of that Act).
And it is declared that it is expedient in the public interest that
this Resolution should have statutory effect under the provisionsof the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968.— (Steve Webb.)
Mr Speaker: I am sure that the Minister who should
be here is exceptionally grateful to the Minister forPensions. I now call Shabana Mahmood.
11.50 am
Shabana Mahmood (Birmingham, Ladywood) (Lab):
I am, frankly, stunned. I am not entirely sure what ismeant to happen in the House of Commons when aMinister is not present. However, I am sure that theMinister would have spoken in favour of the proposalsthat were introduced in yesterday’s autumn statement—
Thomas Docherty (Dunfermline and West Fife) (Lab):
On a point of order, Mr Speaker. As far as I can see, noMinister is present. [Interruption.] I mean that no
Treasury Minister is present. Is this normal practice?How can my hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham,Ladywood (Shabana Mahmood) proceed with her speechwhen there is no Treasury Minister here to respond?
Mr Speaker: Let me say to the hon. Gentleman, on
the strength of having been in the House for 17 years,that I have from time to time observed quite a lot ofthings that do not constitute normal practice. Let mealso say to him, for the avoidance of doubt, that governmentis seamless in procedural terms, and any Minister canmove the motion on the Order Paper.453 454
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Tax[Mr Speaker]
Is it commonplace for the Minister who has direct
responsibility to be absent at the material moment? It isnot, although, in fairness, it having happened nowunder this Government, I should point out that it didhappen on one occasion under the last. It is an irregularstate of affairs, but the Minister who should be herewill, as I have said, be immensely grateful to the Ministerfor Pensions, both for his presence and for his quicknessof mind and fleetness of foot in taking to the DispatchBox. I think that we will leave it there for now.
It must be said that this sort of thing is to be
deprecated—very strongly deprecated—but it does nothappen very often, and I hope that it will not happenagain. No doubt words can be had. It is everyone’sresponsibility to keep an eye on the Annunciator. TheMinister has a duty to be present at the appointedmoment, and the appointed moment can be a movablefeast. It is the responsibility of the Minister and theWhips to make sure that the Minister is present. He orshe was not present, but the Minister for Pensions hashelped out.
Steve McCabe (Birmingham, Selly Oak) (Lab): On a
point of order, Mr Speaker. I just want to clarifysomething. If the Minister eventually manages to turnup, will it be seemly for him to take part in the debate,having not been here at the beginning?
Mr Speaker: The point about being here at the start
relates to statements. I hope that the hon. Gentlemandoes not feel too sore about that.
Steve McCabe: Not at all.
Mr Speaker: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for
his rather adroit piece of time-wasting.
Mr Alan Reid (Argyll and Bute) (LD): On a point of
order, Mr Speaker. This is indeed a day on which we arewitnessing parliamentary events that are not very common.
One possible reason for the Minister’s not being here
on time is that he was caught unexpectedly—surprised—bythe fact that only one Member of the Opposition askeda question in response to the statement by the Ministerfor Pensions. It is the first time in all my years in theHouse that I have been present when OppositionMembers—apart from the Front-Bench spokesman—havehad absolutely nothing to say in response to a statement.Is it not possible that the Minister was held up becausehe expected the statement to last for the normal lengthof time?
Mr Speaker: The hon. Gentleman is not only dexterous
in parliamentary terms, but he is, in my experience, anunfailingly loyal man, and he has done his best to rescuethose on the Treasury Bench in the current circumstances.All that I will say is that Ministers, in any Government,should not be surprised. They must not allow themselvesto be put in a position in which they are surprised, andtherefore not present. The Minister has not spoken, andtherefore if the Minister turns up—and we are gratefulto him or her if he or she does—the Minister will havean opportunity to speak.The Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (Mr Iain
Duncan Smith) rose—
Mr Speaker: I will take a point of order from the
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, but then wemust proceed with Shabana Mahmood’s speech.
Mr Duncan Smith: On a point of order, Mr Speaker.
May I, on behalf of the Government, unreservedlyapologise to you if any indiscretion has been performedor any bad opinion has been made? This is not intentional.My Ministers and I will see this debate through to itsconclusion on behalf of the Government.
Mr Speaker: I am very grateful to the Secretary of
State. We will see whether the Treasury Minister turnsup, but the willingness to help of the Secretary of Statefor Work and Pensions is noted and appreciated, and Ithank him for his typical courtesy in what he has justsaid. Let us now proceed in a pragmatic way and listento Shabana Mahmood.
Shabana Mahmood: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am
not sure that I can respond to an opening speech that Ihave not heard. [Interruption.] Well, the case has not
been made by the Government—the motion has onlybeen made formally—so may I take some guidancefrom you, Mr Speaker, on how best to proceed?
Mr Speaker: Yes, the hon. Lady is welcome to take
guidance from me, and it is this: the hon. Lady’sresponsibility is to speak to the motion on the OrderPaper rather than to any particular speech that might bemade, so while I understand that this is an unusual stateof affairs, the responsibility is to speak to the motion.The hon. Lady knows what the purport of the motionis, so she should not unduly trouble herself by trying toanticipate what the Minister might say if he were here—because he can’t, because he isn’t.
Sir Oliver Heald (North East Hertfordshire) (Con):
On a point of order, Mr Speaker. Yesterday we heardfrom the Chancellor of the Exchequer about a changeto stamp duty land tax on residential property transactions,and I notice that the information he gave yesterday is setout at step 2 of the motion before the House. Would ittherefore be in order for the hon. Member for Birmingham,Ladywood (Shabana Mahmood), in making her speechand her remarks, to go through those points which arealready clearly on the record and are contained in themotion?
Mr Speaker: It would be. It would be perfectly orderly,
and it is good of the hon. and learned Gentleman tooffer to help, but I think we can get by without hisassistance for now.
I hope my guidance to the hon. Lady is clear. I realise
this is an unusual situation for her to face, but if Iremember rightly she is a product of Lincoln college,Oxford, so she is what they call prodigiously bright, andI am sure she can cope with the situation.
Shabana Mahmood: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and
forgive me for seeking clarification on just one furtherpoint: I wonder whether it might be more helpful and455 456
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Taxconducive to bringing the debate along if I come in
later, once the Minister has been able to present himselfin the Chamber.
Mr Speaker: The answer is that the hon. Lady would
need the leave of the House to proceed in that way, butmy strong sense is that the leave of the House would beforthcoming. [Interruption.] I am in receipt of intelligence
on this matter— [Interruption.] The Minister is here! I
was just about to say he was a minute away. TheMinister is with us and we are grateful to the Minister.[Interruption.] Order.
Thomas Docherty: Good afternoon!
Mr Speaker: Mr Docherty, calm yourself. Y ou are
aspiring to be a statesman, but you have got somedistance to travel.
If the Minister is content, he can now speak to his
motion and the hon. Member for Birmingham, Ladywood(Shabana Mahmood), the shadow Minister, can thenrespond. I think that will be the most orderly way toproceed. I am trying to give the Minister, who hasrushed to the Chamber, a chance to recover his breath.In fairness to the Minister, I should say that he came tosee me about these matters the other day, displaying hisusual courtesy, which was much appreciated by theChair, and I know that it is inadvertent on his part thathe is late. These things happen. We do not need to dwellon it. The Minister is here, and I thank him for that, andin the hope he has now recovered his breath, I lookforward to him opening the debate on his own motion.
11.59 am
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr David
Gauke): Inadvertent though it may have been, may I
begin by apologising to you, Mr Speaker, and to theHouse for my late arrival for this debate? May I alsothank my right hon. Friend the Minister for Pensionsfor moving the motion and the hon. Member forBirmingham, Ladywood (Shabana Mahmood) forpermitting me the opportunity to address the House onthis important matter? May I also thank you, Mr Speaker,for your encouragement and support on delivering thisimportant reform and for having the opportunity todiscuss the parliamentary procedure in advance?
Yesterday, as we have heard, the Chancellor, in his
autumn statement, announced an important reform tostamp duty land tax. Moving from a slab to a slicearrangement is right in terms of fairness and economicefficiency. As the Chancellor set out, 98% of peoplewho pay the tax will benefit, and the previous economicdistortions in the system have been removed, benefitingthe housing market generally.
Sir Oliver Heald: The Minister will be aware that in
north Hertfordshire house prices are challenging forfirst-time buyers. I believe that 91%-plus of people willbenefit from this reform and that the relief for thepurchaser of an average house costing £275,000 is asmuch as £4,500. I do not know whether he can confirmthat, but I just wish to pay tribute to the reform, whichwill help a lot of people to get on to the housing ladder.
Mr Gauke: I thank my hon. and learned Friend for
his thoughtful and timely intervention. He raises animportant point and is exactly right in saying that thepurchaser of a house worth £275,000, which is the
average house price in the UK, will pay £4,500 less instamp duty land tax than they would have done underthe old system. The purchaser of a property worth theLondon average of £510,000 will pay £4,900 less SDLT,and in every region, nation or city of the UK peoplewill pay less in the vast majority of transactions.
Mrs Anne Main (St Albans) (Con): I am delighted
that the Treasury has been persuaded of the argument Ihave been making for some time. I recall saying to theMinister that this would be on my Christmas wish listfor my constituents, and I have already received e-mailscongratulating the Chancellor and his Department ondoing this. It is going to save a lot of young people a lotof money when they are trying to get on in the difficulthousing market.
Mr Gauke: I am keen that this does not become a
Hertfordshire-dominated debate, but let me thank myhon. Friend, who has been tireless in campaigning onthis issue. Indeed, she attracted attention to it in anAdjournment debate earlier this year, expressing herviews clearly. In particular, she made the case for helpingthose who want to get on to the housing ladder, and Iknow that is a big issue in her constituency, as it is inmine, where house prices are above the average. She hasmade some important points in this area.
Richard Graham (Gloucester) (Con) rose—
Mr Gauke: In an attempt not to keep this debate
restricted to Hertfordshire MPs, let me give way to myhon. Friend.
Richard Graham: I stand to speak on behalf of my
constituents of Gloucester, providing the geographicaldiversity the Minister was seeking, where the averagehouse price is about £165,000—considerably less thanthe national average of £275,000. So the vast majorityof my constituents buying houses will benefit fromeither a zero rate of SDLT or the 2% rate he hasmentioned. Does he agree that it would be helpful if theTreasury were able to provide information to all of us asto what the savings will be for our constituents, basedon the average house price?
Mr Gauke: My hon. Friend raises an interesting and
important point, and we could provide information onthe basis of local authorities figures. What I can tell himis that in the Gloucester local authority area—I am notsure whether it is coterminous with his seat—more than99% of those who pay SDLT will pay less as a consequenceof these changes.
It is striking to note the diversity of commentators
who have been positive. Estate agents, professional bodiesand others have all shown support. The Royal Institutionof Chartered Surveyors has called it a “long overdue”reform. The director-general of the Council of MortgageLenders said:
“This fundamental reform has been a long time coming...the
vast majority of mortgaged transactions will benefit from lowertax as a result of this move.”
The Building Societies Association has welcomed the
announcement. It said:457 458 4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Tax[Mr Gauke]
“It will help individuals and families buy their own home, and
smooth out the crazy tax jumps buyers have suffered around thetop of each band.”
This is a principled reform that exemplifies the
Government’s commitment to a fairer and more efficienttax system.
The previous SDLT regime created distortions in the
housing market, imposed perverse incentives and madeit harder to get on and move up the property ladder, orindeed move down the property ladder for those wishingto downsize. This major and, as some have argued,overdue reform demonstrates that even in the past sixmonths of this Parliament, we are a Government whoare continuing to make radical change for the benefit ofthe British people.
We realise that this is a big change, even for those
who will benefit at such a significant moment in theirlives. We have ensured that the changes have beenproperly explained. Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customshas produced full guidance on the Government website,including a calculator that compares the old and thenew systems. As of 9 am this morning, that calculatorhad been used almost 500,000 times, with no significantdelays reported, showing the level of interest in thisreform among the public. Critically, HMRC’s specialistcall centre was manned until midnight last night whenthe changes took effect, and is open now. HMRC specialistsresponded to around 250 inquiries by telephone and allbut 3% were resolved immediately, and the remaininghandful are being followed up.
Steve McCabe: Will the Minister confirm that, under
the Labour party’s mansion tax proposals, it would takemore than five years for a person in a £2 millionproperty to pay the same amount of tax that they willpay on a single transaction under these proposals? Isthat a recognition that people in those properties aresimply not paying enough tax?
Mr Gauke: The point I would make, as the hon.
Gentleman draws me into that issue, is that it is better tocollect this tax at the point at which people are enteringinto transactions, the revenue is available, and there arenot the same cash-flow difficulties and problems withthe asset-rich cash poor. This is a much better policythan a mansion tax, which would create very significantdifficulties—a point that was repeatedly made by anumber of Opposition Members who represent Londonseats.
Sir Oliver Heald: My hon. Friend talks about Opposition
Members, but they are not here in the Chamber. Thehon. Member for Birmingham, Selly Oak (Steve McCabe)is the only one and he has come in to moan about apolicy that will help 98% of homebuyers. What sort ofparty is that?
Mr Gauke: Again, my hon. and learned Friend makes
a valuable point. Just on percentages, in Birmingham,more than 99% will benefit from this change. I am surethat the hon. Gentleman’s constituents will welcomethese matters.
Mrs Main: The other point that the hon. Gentleman
fails to realise is that the mansion tax that Labourproposes would be on top of this measure, so thereforehe is doubly worried about the millionaires whom he
wishes to protect. On top of that, Labour would roll upthe mansion tax into a death tax for millionaires.
Mr Gauke: As my hon. Friend has raised that point, I
will make this observation. Labour says that moremoney should be raised from properties worth morethan £2 million. In 2015-16, this measure will raise morethan £300 million from such properties. Obviously, thatis a useful sum for the Exchequer, but if the view is thatLabour wants to raise £1.2 billion from the mansion taxon those properties, will it drop that figure down to£900 million? That is a question that the hon. Gentlemanwill no doubt be seeking to respond to later.
Robert Jenrick (Newark) (Con): This policy was hugely
welcomed in my constituency—Newark and Bingham,two of the fastest-growing towns in the east midlands,have lots of first-time buyers—but will the Ministerprovide some reassurance over rates? Will the rates,which are very high at the top, keep pace with risinghouse prices? We do not want reasonably affluent peopleon middle incomes being drawn into these rates in five,10 or 20 years.
Mr Gauke: We have set out the rates as they stand. If
there is to be any uprating, it will be a matter for futureBudgets and autumn statements, but I stress that acrossthe country 98% of transactions where stamp duty ispaid will see a reduction in SDLT. My hon. Friendraises a matter that might be an issue in the future, butin every city, town and county the majority will benefit.
So far, I have touched on the administrative transitional
steps for the major reforms introduced yesterday andon HMRC’s support. We have also put in placearrangements for individuals who have exchanged contractsbut not yet completed. When the new system came intoforce, transitional rules ensured they would not lose outcompared with what they expected to pay in SDLT. Inthose cases, people have the choice to choose the lesserof the tax rates under the old and new systems. That isonly fair.
I look forward to debating the reforms in full as the
stamp duty land tax Bill progresses. As my right hon.Friend the Leader of the House made clear earlier, thatdiscussion will begin on Second Reading next Wednesday.However, today, I would like briefly to explain ourrationale for introducing the measures via two motionsunder the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968.First, it was important to act quickly, because reform toSDLT was long overdue. Usually, the measures wouldhave formed part of the annual Finance Bill following aBudget, which is why the stand-alone Bill I am introducingtoday is premised on the same financial motions asthose that would follow a Budget. The first motion,which the Chancellor moved yesterday at the end of hisstatement, gave effect to the changes from midnight.That was important to give people certainty and toavoid forestalling.
Secondly, hon. Members will understand that the
measure was subject to strict confidentiality. Giventhe potential impacts on the housing market of a taxchange of this significance, it was right that the measurewas announced first by the Chancellor to the House. Weensured that the motion passed yesterday was availablein the Vote Office immediately as the Chancellor satdown after his main speech and then voted on at the end459 460
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Taxof questions and answers. The motion is effectively the
Bill I hope to introduce in a few moments. For thereasons I set out, it was necessary to have two motionsunder the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act andtoday to allow for a fuller discussion.
I look forward to discussing the Bill in greater depth
next Wednesday, but today is also an opportunity forthe House to debate the matter, and I commend themotion to the House.
12.13 pm
Shabana Mahmood: With the leave of the House, I
wish to respond to the Minister’s speech. I thank himfor eventually making it to the Chamber to move hismotion and introduce the debate—just when I thoughtI had this place sussed out, something else happens toremind me of the many different ways of interpretingparliamentary procedure and rules. I have learned somethingnew today, for which I am grateful.
As we indicated yesterday, once the Chancellor had
made the autumn statement, we will support the measurestoday and the Bill next week. I have seen the draftclauses and explanatory notes—there are only two clausesand one schedule—and we will consider the technicaldetail ahead of the debate next week, but in the meantimeI have a few questions for the Minister. If he cannotanswer them today, I hope he will give us further detailsin time to inform our debate next week.
The reforms to SDLT apply only to residential properties;
the previous stamp duty system—the so-called slabsystem—remains in place for commercial properties.Beyond mere electioneering, what is the Government’sreason for focusing the proposals on the residentialmarket? As he knows, in Scotland, where the ScottishGovernment will take control of stamp duty next April,the land and buildings transactions tax will apply toboth commercial and residential properties, meaningthat Scotland will have the system for both types ofproperty, whereas we will retain two different systems.It would be helpful to understand the Government’sthinking and any assessments the Treasury has done onhaving two different systems.
In the context of corporation tax possibly being
devolved to Northern Ireland, where different circumstancesapply, have the Government done any modelling on thepotential for unhealthy tax competition if we have thisdifferential in the way in which stamp duty operates oncommercial property in Scotland and England? It wouldbe helpful to know how much work the Governmenthave done on that point and whether they plan tointroduce further proposals.
What assumptions have the Government made regarding
house price increases as a result of the stamp dutychanges? It looks like we are seeing a 1.4% increase inprices against a 1% reduction in stamp duty at the lowerend, and it seems also that the tax take from stamp dutywill rely on a 5% annual increase in property prices.Have the Government assessed whether that might pricemore people out of the property market? As the Ministerwill be aware, the OBR’s assessment accompanying theautumn statement states that house prices will continueto rise faster than incomes, which will risk pushinghome ownership further out of reach for many people.Will he share with us the Treasury’s assessment andmodelling in relation to the stamp duty changes and theimpact on home ownership and prices?The last time the Minister and I debated stamp
duty—in a debate introduced by the hon. Member forSt Albans (Mrs Main) in Westminster Hall—it was oneof the only debates the House has had on stamp duty inrecent times. It was a good opportunity for Members toraise issues of concern, and we discussed at length thedifficulties with the system of stamp duty that theGovernment have now changed—the slab structure andso-called cliff edges, which no doubt created significantprice distortions around the thresholds.
Many Members from all parties, housing specialists
and commentators have long complained about thestructure of stamp duty. The Institute for Fiscal Studies,the Mirrlees reviews and others all agreed that the taxwas badly designed. Furthermore, it has undoubtedlybeen an increasing burden on buyers. From 1997 to2005, house price inflation averaged more than 10% ayear, and the proportion of property transactions attractingstamp duty rose from about half to more than threequarters over roughly the same period.
Measures to alleviate the burden focused primarily
on thresholds and stamp duty holidays: the thresholdwas doubled in 2005; temporarily increased by £50,000for one year in 2008; and doubled again for first-timebuyers for three years from March 2010. Stamp dutyhas continued to be a significant burden, however. Ithas increased by 30% between 2009-10 and 2013-14. Wehave seen continued growth in the housing marketand more people have been brought within the highertax bracket, all of which have increased the burdensignificantly. This is therefore a sensible measure, andwe will support it.
Measures to alleviate the burden on buyers are welcome,
but we are experiencing the worst housing crisis for ageneration, and we need much more action on housingsupply if we are to get our housing market into bettershape and help more young people and families torealise their dream of home ownership. I made thispoint to the Minister in the Westminster Hall debate aswell. I am sure the Government will say that they aretaking action on supply through the measures in theautumn statement and in their national infrastructureplan, but most of the announcements made in theflurry of activity over the past couple of days were infact reannouncements of existing schemes and money,and many of the projects are already in the planningsystem.
The truth is that this Government have presided over
the lowest levels of house building in peacetime sincethe 1920s. We are not even building half the homes weneed to keep up with demand. We also know that homeownership is at its lowest level for 30 years and that, inthe next few years, the average deposit is going to rise to£72,000, a sum that is far beyond the reach of many ofour constituents, and certainly of my constituents inBirmingham, Ladywood. We needed to see much moreaction from the Government yesterday on getting homesbuilt as well as on dealing with the issues on the demandside. We have set out our proposals, including a policyof getting 200,000 homes a year built by 2020. It wouldhave been good if the Government could have taken asimilarly ambitious approach to house building in theirautumn statement yesterday. We also need to deal withthe underlying causes of the housing crisis.461 462
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land TaxSir Oliver Heald: The hon. Lady seems to have forgotten
about the great recession that her party visited on thiscountry. It is not surprising that, in those circumstances,fewer houses were built during that period.
Shabana Mahmood: I find it interesting that Government
Members are happy to plead global circumstances toexplain their failures in Government yet convenientlyforget that we had a global financial crisis in 2008. Ithink the hon. and learned Gentleman made that pointin a slightly petty way.
Steve McCabe: If we are supposed to have recovered
from the recession, why is house building now at itslowest level since the 1920s? To me, that sounds like afailure rather than a success.
Shabana Mahmood: My hon. Friend is absolutely
right. The Government said in their autumn statementthat everything was on course. If the finances are insuch a good state, why will they not adopt an ambitiousprogramme of house building? Until we have action onthe supply side, we will not be able to get to grips withthis lop-sided housing market.
We need to get more homes built, and we also need to
deal with the underlying causes of the crisis. For example,we know that too much land is being held as a speculativeinvestment even though local people need homes, andthat the trickle of new developments that are being builtare snapped up long before people from the area canbenefit from them. We also know that our country’scapacity to build homes has shrunk drastically. Fiftyyears ago, the public and private sectors between thembuilt more than 300,000 homes a year; now we rely on asmall number of volume house builders and, as a result,we build far fewer homes.
A number of measures are needed to deal with the
underlying causes of the housing crisis and to get thenumber of homes built that this country needs. We haveproposed new powers for local authorities, as well as ahelp to build scheme to run alongside the Government’sHelp to Buy scheme, which we support. We particularlywant to see an increase in the role of small and medium-sized construction firms, because the resulting diversityin the market would help to get more homes built anddeal with the underlying causes of the crisis. As I havesaid, we need to see supply-side measures in conjunctionwith the proposals on stamp duty and the Help to Buyscheme. That would help us to get to grips with thecrisis and arrive at a position where the dream of homeownership was not so far out of the reach of ourconstituents across the country.
I also want to mention our proposal for a tax on
high-value properties—the so-called mansion tax. Webelieve that that is a necessary measure to get an annualsum of money into our national health service, which isin crisis and in desperate need of further, stable funding.It is interesting that the Chancellor has accepted, in hisstamp duty proposals, the principle that very high-valueproperties in this country are under-taxed. Earlier inthis Parliament, he introduced the annual tax on envelopedwellings—the ATED—which is described as a kind ofmansion tax for high-value properties held by companiesin a corporate envelope. Now, the Government arecharacterising the new stamp duty changes as theirversion of a mansion tax. I wonder why, as they creeptowards an actual mansion tax, they will not make thatfinal leap and simply adopt our proposal, thereby
guaranteeing an annual sum for our national healthservice.
The Prime Minister is reported to have remarked
some time ago that the Government could never introducea mansion tax because the Conservative party’s donorswould not accept it. I wonder whether that is the onlything holding the Government back. The truth is thatthey should go further and adopt our proposal. There isa difference between what they are doing today and ourproposal. Stamp duty is a transaction tax, but our taxon high-value properties would be an annual chargethat would provide a stable source of revenue for thenational health service.
One of the Government’s regular criticisms of our
proposal is that it would hit those who were asset richbut income poor. However, we have already set out howthat could be dealt with through a system of deferral foranyone with an income of less than £42,000 a year—inother words, a basic rate taxpayer. That would be aperfectly sensible and adequate way of helping thosepeople. We could then fairly and progressively introducea tax that would help to get the national health service’sfinances back on track.
Mr Gauke: I should like to ask the hon. Lady a
practical question about her policy of excluding fromthe mansion tax those with an income below £42,000.She will be aware that some of the richest people in thiscountry live off their capital rather than their income.Does she acknowledge that such people could conceivablyfall within the proposed exemption?
Mr Deputy Speaker (Mr Lindsay Hoyle): Order. We
need to be a bit careful here. We should not really bediscussing the policies of the Opposition. The debate isabout stamp duty. We have already had a difficult start,and I do not want things to get any more difficult.
Shabana Mahmood: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker.
I would be happy to discuss those technical details withthe Minister on another occasion when we would notfall out of order.
I reiterate that we expect our policy to raise the
£1.2 billion that, according to the Chief Secretary to theTreasury, internal Treasury modelling has shown itcould raise. We have seen nothing to change our assessmentof those figures. As I was saying, the NHS is in direstraits. There is a crisis in accident and emergency,and it is getting harder to see a GP . This Governmenthave made things worse with their £3 billion top-downreorganisation of the NHS. If that money was availableat the beginning of this Parliament, it should have goneinto front-line services. We therefore need an annualsource of revenue to help to deal with those issues, anda tax on the highest-value homes—the so-called mansiontax—will help the next Labour Government to do that.As I said at the outset, we believe that the proposedchanges to stamp duty represent a sensible measure,and they will have our support today and next weekwhen the proposed legislation is formally brought forward.
12.29 pm
Mrs Anne Main (St Albans) (Con): I am delighted to
speak in this debate and am pleased that the Treasuryhas been persuaded of the need to do this and to find a463 464
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Taxway of doing it, which was the crucial point. I know
that there is no great pot of money out there to throwaround, but this measure is vital for young peoplestruggling to get on the housing ladder and for peopleacross the country. Having looked at the average houseprice in the UK, I know that it will help many familiesin many constituencies, including my own. If I wasbeing very greedy, I would have said that I would haveliked the bands to have been moved up, but I shall resthappy with the fact that we have now got rid of thehated slab structure that caused what I called zombieprices, which no family ever paid. Nobody paid £251,000 fora property, because it incurred an enormous jump in thetax they had to pay.
I believe that one of the reasons why the Help to Buy
scheme was not taken up well inside St Albans was thatour average house price is so high compared with that inthe rest of the country. I found one property at the timethat was under £125,000, and that was a studio. Barelyany properties came under £250,000. If people cannotsave up a deposit, how on earth will they afford to savethe tax as well?
This measure is hugely welcome. I am sorry to say to
my hon. Friend the Financial Secretary that Lori, whoserved me my coffee this morning in Lori’s Café, saidthat her new pin-up is now the Chancellor, because hewill save her thousands of pounds when she moves intoher retirement bungalow early next year. I said that Iwould give Lori’s good wishes to the Chancellor, becauseshe has had a happy Christmas present from him.
Jonathan Edwards (Carmarthen East and Dinefwr)
(PC): I share the hon. Lady’s sentiment that this seemsto be a very progressive measure, but is she not slightlyconcerned that the result might be increased house priceinflation?
Mrs Main: I think that house prices will even out. If
there are more transactions and people put house pricesup, there will be house price inflation, but I believe thatthe Government are trying to tackle that by having a bighouse building programme. The measure will stop thepressure on people who fall around the bands. Peoplehave been told that they cannot charge a certain amountfor their house, even if they have put a conservatory onit or improved their kitchen. Some have not made thoseimprovements because they would have been pressedinto a different band that would have incurred a largeamount of tax.
One point that has not been mentioned so far is the
possible knock-on effect on other industries. Peoplewere telling me that they were reluctant to put in doubleglazing, to build conservatories or to do any improvementsto their houses, that they were struggling to find enoughmoney to buy furniture as well as to pay the depositbecause they had to save for the tax, which they couldnot roll up into their mortgage if they were first-timebuyers, and that they were struggling with the multiples.People were telling me that they were struggling withthe concept of the high fees that they would have to payand worrying how on earth they would buy anythingelse to do with their property. I think that people sellinghome improvements, bathrooms, kitchens, carpets andso on will suddenly find that people who were expectingto pay a large tax bill have a little bit extra in theirpocket, thanks to the Treasury, that they can afford touse to improve their house. They will say that it is worth
their moving house, as they will not have the deterrent.This will free up the market and there will be a lot ofknock-on benefits.
We have to be mindful of house price inflation,
because it excludes a lot of people from the market, butI am absolutely certain that in my area the majority ofpeople who will benefit will be young first-time buyerswho are desperately trying to save that awful combinationof a very large deposit, solicitors’ legal fees and a largebung to the taxman. I am truly grateful that the Treasurywas persuaded of that argument.
I have crunched a few numbers, and I know that
somebody asked whether the Treasury would do this. InSt Albans, a young couple buying their first flat wouldhave paid an average of £8,132 in the stamp duty levyand they will now pay £4,597. That is a large chunk ofmoney when people are starting out in life. Similarly,in a terraced property they would save just over £2,000,in a semi-detached property nearly £5,000 and in adetached four-bedroom property nearly £2,500. At everylevel of average house prices, people will save thousandsof pounds. Many young people, unfortunately, are havingto try to rely on the bank of mum and dad. There willbe quite a lot of relieved mums and dads who have beendigging deep and helping with these heavy burdens whowill be grateful about the measure.
I raised this issue with the Prime Minister in April and
asked whether he would use his good offices to influencethe Treasury on the question of places like St Albans,with barely one house worth less than £250,000. I thankthe Prime Minister if he did that.
I accept that people higher up the ladder will not find
this good news. In a high-value area such as mine,people will say that if they were to move up from their£1.5 million house or even to move down to a £1 millionhouse, they will pay higher stamp duty. As I said, thereis no golden pot of money out there to throw around. Ihope that coming in to the next general election we as aparty will say that we are acting responsibly and that wehave looked at where help is most needed, which iswhere it is being delivered. Unfortunately, there must bea bit of give in the system somewhere and, unfortunatelyfor the people affected, the give in this case is at thehigher end of the market.
I would like to think that stamp duty was originally
meant to target higher-value houses and was nevermeant to catch the people it is catching, including, inmy constituency, young people starting out on theladder and people on the lower income scales. AlthoughI regret that some people will find the measure not totheir liking, especially just before Christmas, the majorityof people trying to get on the housing ladder—in myconstituency, the figure is something like 97%—willfind it a huge bonus. The people who sell double glazing,carpets or kitchen and bathroom improvements whosesmall businesses have been struggling as people havenot been making the investments that would push themover the threshold will, I hope, find that people are nowmaking those investments.
I wholeheartedly welcome the measure and the only
Scrooge-like bit that I would add at the end is, ascolleagues have mentioned, to ask that we keep an eyeon the drag. I would not like to think that other peoplewould soon be sucked in to the wrong bands. I say thewrong bands, because I think at the heart of the Treasury’s465 466
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Tax[Mrs Main]
proposal is a wish to deliver home ownership to lower
income families, young families and people starting outwhile expecting those with the broadest shoulders topay a bit more. I welcome these changes.
12.36 pm
Mark Reckless (Rochester and Strood) (UKIP): It is
a pleasure to follow the hon. Member for St Albans(Mrs Main), who has set a superb example to those onthe Treasury Bench of how to extol this policy. She alsosecured a Westminster Hall debate, which was useful inpressing the arguments for it.
Notwithstanding today’s procedural issues, the Treasury
deserves credit for introducing this measure. It hastaken four and a half years of this Government, but theprevious Government had 13 years and the one beforethat had 18 years without introducing this overdue butincredibly important and beneficial reform.
The hon. Member for St Albans has done a lot to
push the argument forward and so have other Members.I recall having a conversation with the right hon. Memberfor Welwyn Hatfield (Grant Shapps)—at that stage atleast, he was my friend—in which I made the case forreforming this tax, and he said very clearly that, if wewere to do it, it would need to be revenue neutral.However attractive the reform might have been, thenumber of losers would have made it difficult withoutthe £700 million or £800 million a year that the Treasuryare putting in, so there has been a change. If that moneyoils the wheels of a reform that gets rid of substantialdistortions, such as those under the previous tax system,that is a good use of it, and I believe that the Treasuryhas made the right choice.
My constituents will benefit. Much of our housing
stock has been around the £250,000 mark, with ratherless around the £500,000 mark. At both levels, the fixedcharge of £5,000 once people move past those pointshas been a significant problem for the housing marketand, as the hon. Member for St Albans has said, a lot ofthe subsidiary industries based around it. That hasnever been more the case than with the mortgage marketreview and the general reduction in appetite for some ofthe riskier lending among banks that has made it difficultfor young people and those on the early steps of thehousing ladder. They are often capital-constrained andhaving to find the extra money for the stamp dutyalmost invariably means that it cannot be spent onsomething else. It actually often leads to those transactionsnot happening.
I would criticise, not the Treasury, but the Office for
Budget Responsibility for the lack of detailed workingsand the lack of comprehensiveness in its forecast for thehousing market and how that relates to its estimates forthe cost of the stamp duty measure. The OBR hasestimated that transactions would rise by 1.1% on accountof the reform; I am sure that is a great underestimate.Similarly, the OBR has made an assumption—or aforecast—of a 0.2% increase in residential investmentrelative to GDP, yet it has assumed that that will beoffset by reductions elsewhere in the economy, which itfails to particularise or explain.
I am not impressed, in this area or in others, with the
three-men-and-a-dog approach that the OBR has oftentaken. No wonder it cannot be expected to take on theOpposition spending proposals as well, not least because
it just looks at parts of them, casts its eye over them,scans them a bit and says, “That sounds reasonable,”and nods them through. On the housing side, it has notcome anywhere near to taking into account the positiveimpact that the stamp duty reform will have on theeconomy, in freeing up transactions and increasinglabour mobility, especially around the £250,000 and£500,000 pinch points.
I think that the reform will be very significant. The
cost estimates are £365 million for this year, £760 millionfor next year and £840 million the following year. Anassumption has obviously been made of a rise intransactions that leads to the annualised costs fallingoff once we get into the next fiscal year, because therewill have been time for the lags to work through and wewill be witnessing a rise in transactions on account ofthe reform. My strong suspicion, however, is that thatrise in transactions will be quite a lot more than theOBR has stated, and as the hon. Member for St Albanssaid, there will be significant add-ons to other industriesthat depend on the housing market. In my view, as aresult of getting rid of the significant distortions thatwe have had, there will be dynamic, positive impacts onthe economy, which the OBR and—as so often—theTreasury have not taken into account. Such thinkinghas held back good reforms of taxes in these areas.
Mrs Main: The hon. Gentleman rightly said that
labour mobility would increase. People have told methat they were deterred from moving into higher housevalue areas because they would not only have to take ona higher mortgage but find the tax—almost a tax ontheir ability to find a job—if they moved to a placewhere there were more job opportunities but higherhouse values.
Mark Reckless: The hon. Lady is absolutely right,
and that requirement comes when people are mostcapital-constrained, especially in the current mortgagemarket. So charging the tax in that way restricts mobility,restricts spending on moving home and leads to fewertransactions.
I have had constituents who have moved from St Albans
to Rochester and Strood, attracted by our better-valuehousing stock. The hon. Member for Broxbourne(Mr Walker) made a forecast that my return to theHouse as the UKIP Member for Rochester and Stroodwould lead to falls in house prices across my constituency.I am not sure that that will happen, and in any event, Istrongly welcome this real supply-side reform. Whenthe Government do the right thing, particularly in anextremely sensible supply-side reform that should freeup the market and lead to significantly greater economicactivity around the housing market, I am happy tosupport that reform, for my constituents and for myparty.
12.43 pm
Ian Swales (Redcar) (LD): It is a pleasure to follow
the hon. Member for Rochester and Strood (MarkReckless), who made some good wider economic points.The key point about this reform is that the Governmentare making a very large cash input, in effect, to makethe housing market more liquid and help people movehouse when they want or need to.467 468
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land TaxThe Government and the Treasury should look at
every system where there are huge slab effects, whetheron the tax or the benefits side. Slab systems, by theirnature, produce cliff edges; and cliff edges, by theirnature, produce strange behaviour. We see that in thecurrent benefits system, where interactions between benefitscan produce behaviour that was never intended. In thiscase, those boundaries have led to elaborate avoidance.Overpricing of carpets and curtains is commonly usedto reduce the apparent house price to below a threshold.Smoothing out the profile of stamp duty chargingreduces the necessity to engage in such above-boardavoidance, or nefarious avoidance, which I am sure hasgone on as well, owing to the large sums of moneyinvolved.
I very much welcome the changes. I should declare an
interest, in that my daughter, who lives in Basingstoke,is likely to benefit from them very soon. The reformcould have been carried out in a cash-neutral way, butwould have been difficult to implement because of thelosers involved, so I welcome the injection of moneythat has enabled it to be framed in such a way that 98%of people will see no change or a saving.
This progressive reform is another example of how
the Government are making the people with the broadestshoulders bear the biggest burden. Houses sold at over£937,000 will incur an increase in stamp duty, and a£5 million house will incur a stamp duty increase from£350,000 to half a million pounds—so an extra £160,000on a large house.
Mark Reckless: May I put on the record a correction
in relation to figures that were mentioned earlier in thedebate? Purchasers of houses between £937,000 and£1 million lose out. Then there is another quite significantarea from £1 million up to, I think, between £1.15 millionand £1.2 million that will benefit from the reform.
Ian Swales: I thank the hon. Gentleman for that
clarification. It is not something that I have examinedclosely, given the nature of my constituency, which Ishall mention.
The reform is yet another example of increasing tax
on millionaires, which has happened on so many frontsunder this Government, including capital gains andpensions contributions. Also, with the exception of thevery last day of the previous Government, income tax is5% higher than it was in their 13 years. I welcome that;it is important that we make those who are most able todo so pay more, and this is yet another measure bywhich we are doing that.
There are some oddities. People will gain all the way
up the chain, but for those buying at exactly £250,000 andexactly £500,000 there is no gain.
The effect in my constituency of Redcar is pretty
good. I do not think that there is a property worth£937,000 in the entire constituency, so every one of myconstituents will benefit from the change. I have towelcome it from that point of view. I simply ask theMinister for clarification on the point that we alwayshave to raise on Treasury measures: whether there is anypossibility of avoidance. Will these arrangements beapplied clearly to overseas buyers? Will they be appliedto corporate buyers when the house is being movedthrough a share transfer—and is that loophole being, orhas it been, closed? Will they be applied where the
house is being bought to let, either by individual landlordsor a corporate structure?
With those few questions on avoidance, I fully support
these measures. Making the housing market more liquidwill lead to a stronger economy, and the way in whichthe reform is being implemented leads to a fairer society.
12.48 pm
Mr Marcus Jones (Nuneaton) (Con): I warmly welcome
the motion. I congratulate the Financial Secretary tothe Treasury and the Chancellor on the help that theyare giving to home buyers. I thank the Financial Secretaryfor listening, not just to the concerns of Members,particularly on the Government Benches, about stampduty, but about how the Government may implementthe policy. The Government have done absolutely theright thing to effect this policy immediately.
Back in the dark days of the great recession under
Labour in 2009, when I was conveyancing residentialproperty, the property market was on its knees. TheGovernment of the day brought in a very welcomestamp duty holiday. That said, there were six or sevenweeks between its announcement—at the Budget, Ibelieve—and its implementation, depressing further analready very depressed property market. So I welcomewhat the Government have done and my hon. Friend’staking on board those points.
The Government have taken the right approach to
dealing with the problems associated with stamp duty.The major problem was the slab rate and the effect thatit had, not just for people buying property who have topay the stamp duty, but for people selling property.Those selling property at an asking price of £255,000,£265,000 or £275,000 have for some time been facedwith the prospect of either having to do some dodgydeal involving carpets, curtains and other chattels, inwhich after the Finance Act 2004 and changes to stampduty legislation most firms of solicitors were not willingto participate, or changing their price, often having toreduce it considerably, below the £250,000 mark, where1% stamp duty would be payable and the buyer wouldhave to pay £2,500 rather than £7,500. The reform willmake a massive difference to people selling property.
Mr John Redwood (Wokingham) (Con): One of the
most persuasive points that we were able to make to theChancellor when we lobbied him was that there werebands in the market where there were effectively notransactions at all because people could not get buyersto pay that little bit extra. That was distorting the valueof their homes.
Mr Jones: I agree. Some of the people in that position
will probably have enough equity now to move on andbuy second and third homes. The measure will beextremely valuable to such people.
Sir Oliver Heald: Does my hon. Friend agree that one
of the other aspects was that some property prices werepitched that little bit higher so that people were notright next to the line? That created a gap in the marketpricing structure in both directions.
Mr Jones: Again, I agree. The old system created
nothing but distortion in the property market. Whatwill happen now—as I said, I am glad it is going to469 470
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Tax[Mr Marcus Jones]
happen straight away—is that people buying at £250,000,
although that is not a realistic price, will pay just 1%,the same £2,500 as before, and 5% only on any amountabove that, which will make a massive difference.
Mrs Main: As I understood it yesterday, if contracts
have already been exchanged, the purchaser can choosewhich system to use, to allow fairness in the system.Does my hon. Friend agree that although the measuretakes effect immediately, there is still flexibility?
Mr Jones: My hon. Friend is right and that was the
fair thing to do. We must have sympathy, though, forpeople who completed transactions before yesterday.The new system cannot be made retrospective, which isa great shame for them, but it is a bonus for people inthe process of buying property and for future buyers,especially as it will allow some people to free up somemoney so that they can go ahead and buy things thatthey will need for their new home or undertakeimprovements.
I have many buyers in my constituency who are
buying at a price between £125,000 and £250,000, andthe reform will make a massive difference to them too.They will not have to pay the full slab rate of 1% on thewhole purchase price. The measure will have a majoreffect not just in the south-east, but in the midlands andthe north of the country. Over the years many people,especially those selling and buying on, have added thestamp duty cost to their new mortgage, so they werepaying the stamp duty to the Government at whateverrate, and paying that money back over 25 years or forhowever long their mortgage ran. On a large scale, thatwould cause a massive cost. The new system shouldreduce that burden too.
I draw the Minister’s attention to the way in which
the stamp duty land tax is administered. From theFinance Act 2004 onwards, a very simple process becameextremely time-consuming and convoluted, which increasedthe cost of conveyancing to many buyers. My hon.Friend the Minister may want to consider examininghow Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs deals withthese matters, to see whether some simplification mayreduce the administration costs for buyers.
I thank members of the Treasury team for the action
that is being taken. It will be a great help for first-timebuyers and for people who want to move on. It is apolicy for people who work hard and have aspiration. Iwelcome it in its entirety.
12.56 pm
Mr Dominic Raab (Esher and Walton) (Con): It is a
pleasure, as always, to follow my hon. Friend the Memberfor Nuneaton (Mr Jones), who made a range of importantpoints in typically common-sense language.
I, like others, welcome the Chancellor’s autumn
statement. Like business rates reform, which is anotheraspect I wholeheartedly welcome, a major overhaul ofstamp duty is long overdue. I pay tribute to my hon.Friend the Member for St Albans (Mrs Main), who hasconducted a tenacious campaign for major substantivereform of stamp duty. If the experience of our hon.Friend the Member for Harlow (Robert Halfon) isanything to go by, she will shortly be elevated to asenior rank. I am sure she will be thrilled by that.I am delighted that the Chancellor is taking action
against what was one of Labour’s most arbitrary stealthtaxes. The way it operated was a pretty vindictive assaulton aspirational low and middle-income savers. Thepoint has been made that, economically, a well functioninghousing market should enable people to engage in mutuallybeneficial transactions, and make efficient use of housingstock. That is extremely important. A family in a smallhouse should be able to move to a larger one, if theyneed to do so because of a growing family or if someoneis earning more following a promotion. Older couplesshould be free to downsize when they want, not least tofree up cash for other needs. Stamp duty has been apoorly designed tax that has undercut social mobilityupwards and downwards.
In my constituency, we have felt that burden
disproportionately. Of course, there are many familiesliving in Elmbridge who are on very high incomes, butthat does not mean that across the board it is some kindof land of milk and honey. For many of the residentswhom I come across, their home is a nest egg built upafter many years of saving. They may be asset-rich butincome-poor. They may want to downsize to releasecash for income or even the costs of care. Stamp dutyhas had a totally arbitrary impact on them. We alsohave a problem with key workers, who are vital for thedelivery of local public services. They find it unaffordableto live locally and stamp duty has exacerbated thatproblem.
Above all, we have a wide range and large number of
middle-income families, working hard, saving and facingvery high cost of living pressures, and affordable housingis a major factor. As of the second quarter of last year,the median house price in Elmbridge was £445,000.That price has almost certainly risen substantially sincethen, but it does not buy a mansion. I can say that assomeone who lives in my constituency. Typically thatprice would buy a two-bedroom home, which under theold regime would land the buyer with a massive stampduty bill of over £13,000. According to the most recentmarket data, a family in a small home looking to buy alarger one would be left facing a bill of £13,000 or morefor the average two-bedroom property, and £23,000 ormore for the average three-bedroom home.
The cumulative bill is staggering. In 2012-13 my
constituents paid £56 million to the Exchequer in stampduty on residential property, which is more than thetotal paid in the whole of the north-east of Englandand a third of the figure for the whole of Scotland. Ofcourse, Esher and Walton is just one area, and there areobviously geographic differences in incomes as well ashouse prices, but they do not necessarily match up, andthey certainly do not tally neatly or consistently in myconstituency. Elmbridge is just one example of stampduty’s geographical unevenness. London accounted for41% of residential stamp duty in 2012-13, and thesouth-east of England accounted for a further 22%.England as a whole accounted for 94% of UK stampduty. It therefore has a very particular geographicalburden, and it is not filtered according to income.
Stamp duty is not an economically efficient tax, as we
have heard time and again. Stamp duty on residentialproperty distorts the whole structure of the housingmarket. In particular, the slab structure, under whichthe relevant rates apply to the full sale price, not just thepart above the relevant threshold, has created huge cliff471 472
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Taxedges, as we have heard this afternoon. It is worth
dwelling on the impact of the slab structure. I think thatthe Chancellor made the point exceptionally well yesterday.A £1 increase in the price of a home, from £249,999 to£250,000, triggers an extra £5,000 tax liability. That cliffedge has been shown to be harmful to home owners andwould-be buyers. It is worth remembering that stampduty is a tax on transactions, so it impacts on thepurchaser and the seller.
Property experts London Central Portfolio, together
with the Cass business school, have put together ananalysis that estimates that close to 14,000 home ownersa year are forced to reduce the asking price for theirhome in order to get under a stamp duty threshold.Other would-be sellers are either unable or unwilling toreduce their prices to below the nearest threshold. Thatcauses bottlenecks in the market and a drought ofavailable properties in certain price ranges in certainareas, which is very harmful to the market and hasimportant social as well as economic impacts.
It is little wonder that the Institute for Fiscal Studies
has described stamp duty as
“a strong contender for the UK’s worst-designed tax”,
with a “perverse” and “absurd” structure. The directorof the IFS argued earlier this year that in the modernera of broadly based taxation, the case for maintainingstamp duty at all is “very weak indeed”.
Mrs Main: I pay tribute to my hon. Friend, who
along with me secured the stamp duty debate in Septemberand who has raised these matters on numerous occasionsin the media. Does he share my concern that that debatewas very poorly attended by the other parties? Indeed,it was very much Members on the Government sidewho were concerned about the matter.
Mr Raab: My hon. Friend, as usual, makes her point
powerfully. As is so often the case, the real democraticdebate and scrutiny is taking place on this side of theHouse, but at least the Labour party accepts thesechanges. I hope that in due course it will reflect and putpaid to some of its ridiculous notions about a mansionstax, which is really about the politics of envy, ratherthan sensible economics or social fairness.
I want to move on to the impact of stamp duty,
because it has also proved socially unfair. When theadditional 3% and 4% rates were introduced in 2000,they were designed for the wealthy. Had the thresholdrisen in line with house price inflation, only propertiesworth £1.3 million would attract 3% stamp duty today.The Chancellor’s reforms will make a vital differenceand I fully support the direction of travel. The movefrom the slab structure to marginal rates is far moreeconomically efficient. It will unblock bottlenecks inthe market, which also have a negative effect on housingsupply and stock. I wholeheartedly welcome this move.
Likewise, I recognise that the vast majority of home
buyers, and as a result sellers, will benefit. The tippingpoint at which buyers will pay more as a result of thereform kicks in at just under £940,000. I have two pointsto make about that. First—this relates to my earlierpoint about house prices varying dramatically acrossthe country—there are plenty of three-bedroom homesin my constituency, as I am sure there are in Londonand in other constituencies, that will already be caughtby the new system and will end up paying significantlymore. They are not mansions owned by the super-rich;
many are owned by people who have saved and so areasset-rich but income-poor. Again, London and thesouth-east will feel the burden. I do not think that wecan always assume that it will hit only those with thebroadest shoulders; it will also hit those who have savedand planned their finances over the long term, and itwill have a significant impact.
Secondly—this is the missing piece of the jigsaw—given
the forecasts for house price inflation, buyers of average-priced homes in many parts of London and the south-eastwill in a relatively short time find themselves payingsubstantially more. Over time, the higher rates will, bystealth, hit more and more middle-class buyers andsellers. In London and the south-east, median homebuyers could be caught by the new 10% rate within10 years, depending on how the forecasts for houseprices turn out. To be clear, that means that within adecade—more or less—average home buyers could behit by the 10% rate. Recent experience with the 3% and4% rates of stamp duty under Labour shows that whatstarts as a tax aimed at the rich, within a relatively shortperiod of time if we are not very careful ends upclobbering the middle classes. I hope that in the immediateor not too distant future Ministers will address thatpoint square on by indexing the thresholds for all ratesto house price inflation. That way, we can learn thelessons and avoid the mistakes of previous LabourGovernments.
If we do not address fiscal drag now, and instead kick
it into the long grass, we risk ending up over timerobbing middle-class Peter to pay working-class Paul,and I do not think that we should be engaged in that, asa matter of sound economics, social fairness, or indeedlong-term sustainable politics. Instead, we should beensuring, as part of our long-term economic plan, thatover the long term all low and middle-income aspirationalsavers and home buyers benefit from these importantand welcome reforms.
1.7 pm
Mr Gauke: It is a pleasure to reply to this debate. I am
grateful for the warm support for this measure. I amsometimes so enthusiastic about these changes to SDLTthat I am almost breathless, but thankfully on thisoccasion I am not. A number of points have been raisedabout this measure. Of course, there will be an opportunityto debate the legislation on Second Reading nextWednesday, when we might pick up some of thosepoints. However, I will attempt to address some of theissues that have been raised in the debate.
The hon. Member for Birmingham, Ladywood (Shabana
Mahmood) asked why we are not reforming non-residentialSDLT at the same time. The argument I would make isthat the market for non-residential property is verydifferent, and the urgency for change is not the same, soI think that a different case needs to be made in thatregard. We are not persuaded by the need to changethat at present. Of course, all taxes are kept underreview and the Government will consider that ahead offuture fiscal events.
The hon. Lady also asked about the impact on the
housing market. As I have said, our reforms will changethe amount of SDLT due for the majority of homes,leading to a cut in the cost of moving home in the vast473 474
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land Tax[Mr Gauke]
majority of cases. That will have a small impact on
house prices overall, although the size of that effect isexpected to be lower than the usual fluctuations in thehousing market caused by many factors that occur yearon year. I am not denying that there will be an effect,but there are many factors that come into play when itcomes to house prices—
Mark Reckless rose—
Mr Gauke: And one of those factors, I suppose,
could be the selection of an unfortunate party, but I willgive way to the hon. Gentleman at that point.
Mark Reckless: Was the Minister citing his own view
just now, or merely regurgitating that of the OBR,because the major change in its forecast, of course, isthat it has just changed its forecasting method fromassuming that it will be average earnings in future toemploying a model that it had only used in earlieryears?
Mr Gauke: The hon. Gentleman brings me to his
points about the OBR assessment. I was interested tohear what he said about modelling. He argued that theconsequence of the changes we are implementing wouldbe more beneficial for the economy than the OBR hasset out in its projections. It is right that the OBR isindependent and reaches its own conclusions. If thenumbers are of a cautious nature, as he argues, then it isbetter to err on the side of caution. He made aninteresting argument. I believe that these changes willhave a beneficial effect in terms of labour market mobilityand so on, and should therefore be welcomed. In puttingthe numbers into the public finances, it is right that wefollow the independent body.
As I said earlier, my hon. Friend the Member for
St Albans (Mrs Main) has been very prominent andpersistent in making the case for reform of stamp duty.I am pleased that she welcomed these reforms soenthusiastically. I shall certainly ensure that the Chancelloris made aware of the views of Lori, her constituent,who is putting up a poster of him as a consequence ofthe reforms. I am very pleased that they have pleasedLori, and, I am sure, many other residents of St Albans.My hon. Friend made an important point about “zombiezones”; I think the hon. Member for Birmingham,Ladywood referred to “bunching”. The OBR statisticson how the pattern of transactions can be distorted areinteresting. For example, there are 30 times moretransactions in the £5,000 band below the £250,000threshold than in the £5,000 band above it. That givesan indication of the scale of the distortions in theprevious regime.
The hon. Members for Rochester and Strood (Mark
Reckless) and for Redcar (Ian Swales) asked whethercash-neutral reform would be possible. It would havebeen very difficult to make these changes without somecost to the Exchequer in terms of forgone revenue. Thatmight answer the question, “Why do this now?” As aconsequence of other measures brought forward in theautumn statement, we can afford to fund these reforms,and it is right that we took that opportunity.
The hon. Member for Redcar referred to avoidance.
Stamp duty land tax was being avoided far too often.One of the significant achievements of the Government
and HMRC in the past few years is that we havemanaged to address that in relation to the number ofSDLT schemes marketed by tax avoidance advisers, if Imay put it that way—promoters of tax avoidance schemes.The amount of that avoidance has reduced very sharply.We have brought in a number of effective measures. Forexample, the annual tax on enveloped dwellings hasplayed an important role. We have made great progresson this. For that reason, we are able to get the revenuethat we will get because of the changes affecting high-endproperty.
My hon. Friend the Member for Nuneaton (Mr Jones)
highlighted the reasons for ensuring that there is no gapbetween announcement and implementation. That iswhy this is a PCTA motion. I remember him makingthat point to me in private some months ago, so he maywell have influenced the way in which the Governmenthave proceeded, given the need to move forward.
My hon. Friend the Member for Esher and Walton
(Mr Raab) made a very thoughtful speech, and I amgrateful for his observations. He is a long-standing criticof the stamp duty regime, and he has been very energeticin highlighting some of the failures in the system. Hetalked about future uprating. He was also the firstspeaker to use the expression “long-term economicplan”, so I congratulate him on rectifying a grievousomission from the debate until that point. On futureuprating, as I said to my hon. Friend the Member forNewark (Robert Jenrick), we have set out the bands. Wehave not set out plans for indexation or future uprating,but future Governments will clearly wish to return tothat in the long term. As my hon. Friend the Memberfor Esher and Walton said, we will no doubt have thisdebate on a number of occasions. I dare say that he willbe very energetic in campaigning for uprating in future,and I look forward to receiving his representations.
I thank the House for its support for this measure,
and reiterate my apology for not being here at the verybeginning of the debate. I hope that the motion willhave the support of the House.
Question put and agreed to.Ordered, That a Bill be brought in upon the foregoing
Resolutions relating to Stamp Duty Land Tax (ResidentialProperty Transactions);
That the Chairman of Ways and Means, the Prime
Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Chancellor ofthe Exchequer, Danny Alexander, Secretary Eric Pickles,Mr David Gauke, Priti Patel and Andrea Leadsombring in the Bill.
S
TAMP DUTYLANDTAXBILL
Presentation and First Reading
Mr David Gauke accordingly presented a Bill to
make provision about stamp duty land tax on residentialproperty transactions; and for connected purposes.
Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time
tomorrow, and to be printed (Bill 132) with explanatorynotes (Bill 132—EN).475 476
4 DECEMBER 2014 Stamp Duty Land Tax Stamp Duty Land TaxBackbench Business
Financial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme
1.17 pm
Guto Bebb (Aberconwy) (Con): I beg to move,
That this House has considered the Financial Conduct Authority’s
redress scheme, adopted as a result of the mis-selling of complexinterest rate derivatives to small and medium sized businesses,and has found the scheme’s implementation to be lacking inconsistency and basic fairness; considers such failures to beunacceptable; is concerned about lack of transparency of arrangementsbetween the regulator and the banks; is concerned about thelonger than expected time scale for implementation; calls for aprompt resolution of these matters; and asks for the Governmentto consider appointing an independent inquiry to explore boththese failings and to expedite compensation for victims.
This is the third debate that I have led on interest rate
mis-selling. I wish to express my gratitude to the BackbenchBusiness Committee for allowing further time to debatethis important issue in the main Chamber of the House.
The fact that we have a third debate is a good thing
and a bad thing. It is clearly a good thing because hon.Members are still taking an interest in the issue. It is abad thing because three years after the first debate,hundreds, if not thousands of businesses still feel thatthey have not been dealt with fairly or adequately by theredress scheme that was put in place by the FinancialConduct Authority. It is therefore important to exploretheir concerns.
We are coming to the end of the redress scheme, so it
is appropriate that we examine its successes and failuresat this point. I am, in general, an individual who seesthe world in a “glass half full” rather than a “glass halfempty” manner—some of my colleagues would perhapsdispute that—and I think it important to highlightsome of the successes. First, 91% of all the sales examinedwithin the scheme have been found to be non-compliant.That fact alone justifies all the effort that has been putin by Members from across the Chamber in ensuringthat this issue was addressed by the banking system.Similarly, 99% of all redress determinations have beencommunicated to customers. A total of 14,000 redressoffers have been made to date, 10,500 of which havebeen accepted. Some £1.5 billion in redress has beenpaid out. Some £1 billion—perhaps even £1.1 billion—ofcancelled swaps have been hugely beneficial to the businessesthat were affected. Most importantly, as a result of thesuccesses that I mentioned, businesses and individuallives have been put back on track. We should, as aHouse, acknowledge those successes. However, whenthis Chamber called for the establishment of a redressscheme, we wanted a scheme that would be fair andequitable to all the businesses affected.
Bill Wiggin (North Herefordshire) (Con): I agree
with my hon. Friend, but my constituent John Kidd hasso far spent 74 weeks battling the FCA when ideally itshould take 12 weeks. My hon. Friend must not be tookind to the FCA.
Guto Bebb: I agree entirely. The time scales of some
of the redress offers have been completely unacceptable.Indeed, at the scheme’s outset there was a six-monthdelay in order to ensure a consistency of approach
across the 11 banks that volunteered to be part of it.One of the concerns I wish to highlight is that thatsix-month delay has not resulted in the consistencydemanded by the FCA, so I accept entirely my hon.Friend’s point.
I will summarise my concerns about the FCA scheme.
There has been a lack of consistency in the schemedespite it being established with a view to having consistency.There has also been a tremendous lack of transparency,which I will deal with in detail.
Alok Sharma (Reading West) (Con): This is, of course,
a voluntary arrangement that has been entered into.Does my hon. Friend think it would have been better ifit had been a statutory agreement, which would have ledto much more transparency?
Guto Bebb: My hon. Friend makes a very important
and interesting point. There was a need at the outset toensure that the issue of redress was addressed as quicklyas possible and it was felt that a voluntary schemewould do that without the need for a fully judicialprocess. However, in view of the lack of transparency inthe scheme as it stands, I sympathise with my hon.Friend’s point.
My third concern is that the redress scheme lacks an
appeal process. That issue could be dealt with verysimply without creating any further confusion, and Iwill go on to talk about that in due course. There is alsoa serious concern about the issue of consequentiallosses in the redress scheme as it stands.
Sir Oliver Heald (North East Hertfordshire) (Con):
On consistency, it is hard to see exactly what the differenceis between an embedded swap and a separate swap thatis tied to a loan agreement. Is that an issue of concernto my hon. Friend, and what does he think could bedone to improve it?
Guto Bebb: I am sure my hon. and learned Friend’s
point will be supported by thousands of businesses thatfeel they have been excluded from the scheme. Theymight not think that it is working properly, but they dofeel that they should have been included. That exclusionhas not been explained to the satisfaction of either thebusinesses affected or the all-party group on interestrate swap mis-selling. Indeed, that is one of the issues Iwill touch on when I address the scheme’s lack oftransparency.
Michael Moore (Berwickshire, Roxburgh and Selkirk)
(LD): I pay tribute to my hon. Friend for all the work hehas been doing on this issue with others across theHouse. One of my constituents, Heather Buchanan,and her husband have, happily, got redress, but they arenow in a major battle about consequential losses. Doesmy hon. Friend have a view on how we can helpcollectively focus attention on bad issues so that theyare not lost in the murk of commercial negotiations inthe banks?
Guto Bebb: I am grateful for that intervention. The
issue of consequential losses is of significant concern,because when the FCA redress scheme was establishedit clearly said that consequential losses would be dealt477 478
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Guto Bebb]
with on the basis of accepted legal principles, and yet of
the £310 million-worth of consequential losses thathave been paid out, £305 million relates only to interestat 8%. In other words, claims for other consequentiallosses have been derisory under the scheme thus far.
I want to highlight two other concerns. Tax treatment
of redress payments is a real concern that can be dealtwith by the Government and, as I have said, I will alsotouch on the exclusion of those businesses sold embeddedswaps.
I will be quick, because I am aware that many hon.
Members want to speak. I have a simple first exampleof the lack of consistency. When the scheme was established,it was decided that consequential losses and the redresswould be paid in one instalment. Many businessesargued that that was unreasonable and unfair, and as aresult of the second Backbench Business debate on thisissue, nine of the 11 banks that are in the scheme agreedthat they would split those payments. The FCA, however,despite saying that it wanted a consistent scheme, hasallowed two banks to continue to insist on a singlepayment. That is a clear example of a lack of consistency.
The evidence I have gathered also shows that there is
a lack of consistency on outcomes within individualbanks, which clearly raises a question about how thework of independent reviewers is being overseen. Ifthey are coming up with conclusions and recommendationsfor redress that are significantly different for businesseswith very similar problems, there is a question as towhether the work of those independent reviewers isbeing monitored properly.
Mr Marcus Jones (Nuneaton) (Con): My hon. Friend
has been a stalwart campaigner on this issue and deservesgreat credit. On transparency, is there not a questionabout whether those reviewers, the review process andthe reports they provide are truly independent? Constituentsof mine who have been caught up in this have notreceived any of that information.
Guto Bebb: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his
intervention and agree with his rather depressing analysis,because my second point is that there is a concern aboutthe significant lack of consistency on redress among thebanks. We have to draw the attention of the House tothe accusation published in The Times this morning
that some banks have been putting pressure on theirindependent reviewers to make recommendations forredress that are acceptable to the banks rather than tothe business in question. The allegation is made by awhistleblower who worked for KPMG on the independentreview of RBS cases. It reflects anecdotal evidence fromBully-Banks, the campaigning organisation, that RBScustomers have a 12% chance of getting a full tear-up,which is significantly less than the 65% at Barclays, 89%at Lloyds Banking Group and 64% at HSBC. If this is aconsistent scheme, it is difficult to understand how theoutcomes for individual businesses in one bank are sosignificantly different from those in other banks.
One of my concerns about transparency is that the
FCA is not making available figures that highlight theoutcomes on a bank-by-bank basis. It is simply givingus global figures. I accept that my concerns are based onanecdotal evidence, but it does seem to match evidencefrom other sources, including that provided to me by an
independent reviewer working for HSBC who claimsthat HSBC feels that RBS is taking advantage, and thatfrom the whistleblower from KPMG who worked onthe RBS redress scheme who claims that RBS is challengingany claim over £750,000. The evidence is stacking upthat this is not a consistent scheme.
Mr Marcus Jones: I thank my hon. Friend for giving
way again—he is being very generous. Does he agreethat the FCA should look for consistency rather thansimply come to us as constituency MPs when we raiseissues and tell us, in effect, that it agrees with a bank’sindependent reviewer without explaining why?
Guto Bebb: I could not agree more. Put simply, the
regulator should be regulating its own redress scheme.It is simply not good enough for the FCA consistentlyto say that the decision has been approved by theindependent reviewer if there are doubts about theirbehaviour.
Steve Rotheram (Liverpool, Walton) (Lab): I, too,
congratulate the hon. Gentleman on bringing this issueto the House’s attention. The only thing that is consistentand transparent is that the banks that caused the financialcrash are profiting from selling products such as interestrate hedging products, which were bought by a companyin my constituency, the Flanagan Group, and havecaused it great difficulty. Does the hon. Gentlemanthink it is right that the banks should be profiting as aresult of mis-selling products?
Guto Bebb: Of course not. The whole reason behind
establishing the redress scheme is to try to deal with thewrongdoing of the banks. My concern is that the schemehas not succeeded as expected.
Paul Farrelly (Newcastle-under-Lyme) (Lab) rose—
Guto Bebb: I will take one final intervention; otherwise
I will be told off by Mr Deputy Speaker.
Paul Farrelly: Does the hon. Gentleman agree that
the level of provisioning in the banks suggests that thereis inconsistency? For instance, in RBS there were 7,300 casesand £1.4 billion of provisions, while in Barclays therewere 2,900 cases and £1.5 billion of provisions.
Guto Bebb: The hon. Gentleman makes an important
point. There have been concerns throughout the processabout the level of provision within banks. In view ofsome of the information provided by the KPMGwhistleblower, RBS’s confidence in having a very lowlevel of provision probably justifies its attitude to thereview.
Another point about the lack of consistency relates
again, unfortunately, to the behaviour of RBS. It hasbeen argued that a good result for a business from theredress scheme is to have a full tear-up of the agreementor to implement a cap rather than a swap. Indeed, it hasbeen argued that a cap would in many cases have been amuch better original product. From the detail of manyof the caps offered to RBS customers, it transpires thatmost of them are for 10 years. I do not claim to be anexpert, but experts in the field of derivatives and interestrate protection tell me that there is no demand in the479 480
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schememarketplace for a 10-year cap. They have challenged
RBS to give one example of a 10-year cap that it hassold commercially in the past 10 years, but as yet RBShas not come back with such an example. Yet, time andagain when businesses are offered a cap as an alternativeproduct, the cap is for 10 years. It will not surprise hon.Members to learn that a 10-year cap is significantlymore expensive than a five-year one. That added costcomes out of the redress made available to the relevantbusinesses. There are therefore questions to be askedabout the behaviour of some banks, including RBS,and those questions raise doubts about the consistencyof the scheme.
On transparency, I am concerned that the agreement
between the banks has not been disclosed. That meansthat it is very difficult to assess the success or otherwiseof an outcome, because we do not know what to measureit against. The agreement has not been made availableto the all-party group or the Treasury Committee, but Imust ask why, because when the FCA says that it isrobustly ensuring that the agreement is maintained, wecannot assess whether that is the case.
Mark Garnier (Wyre Forest) (Con): Will my hon.
Friend give way?
Guto Bebb: I will of course give way to a member of
the Treasury Committee.
Mark Garnier: I, too, congratulate my hon. Friend
on all the work he has done so far. Given that this is thefirst time that a voluntary scheme has been used, doeshe agree that full transparency of the whole system isabsolutely crucial in ensuring that the scheme can safelybe used again in future? Otherwise, there will be long-termfundamental doubt about whether it should ever beused again.
Guto Bebb: I could not agree more. I am concerned
that some of the banks involved in the scheme now fearthat they have played by the rules, while others have not.If there is no transparency on that issue, banks may gointo future schemes with the same attitude as RBS’sattitude to this scheme.
We do not have bank-by-bank details on outcomes,
so it is very difficult to measure whether they areappropriate. In the same way, there is real concern thatthe FCA has not fully shared its legal opinion onexcluding businesses with embedded swaps from thewhole review process. In the briefing that the FCAprovided for this debate, it implies that it has fullyshared its information on that with the Treasury Committee,but my understanding is that it was willing only to allowa QC acting on the Treasury Committee’s behalf, not itsmembers, to see the information. I do not consider thatto be full accountability to Parliament.
I said that I would call on the FCA to consider an
appeal process. In view of the revelations about thepossible activities of the KPMG reviewers of RBS,there is merit in a proposal made by the all-party groupa year and a half ago. All the independent reviewershave been trained to the FCA ’s satisfaction, so if anRBS client is unhappy with its outcome it would surelybe appropriate to ask another independent reviewer—forexample, Deloitte, which acts in relation to HSBC—toreview the case. That would not unduly complicate thesituation, because the reviewers have been trained bythe RCA and have satisfied it as to their expertise. It
would give clients a degree of independence if thoseunhappy with the redress outcome could have all thecase notes reviewed by a third party that is independentof the original bank and of its independent reviewer.Will the Economic Secretary consider that request?
Zac Goldsmith (Richmond Park) (Con): Eight or
nine of my constituents have asked me to put on recordtheir enormous gratitude to my hon. Friend for hisextraordinary work in leading this campaign, and I amvery pleased to do so. What arguments has he heardagainst his proposed appeal system so far, because it isvery hard to imagine any deal-breaking arguments againstsuch a logical solution?
Guto Bebb: I entirely agree. The argument has been
that as the reviewers are independent the FCA can havefull trust in them, but in view of the inequitable outcomesreported to us and the information provided by thewhistleblower who used to work in the independentreview team on RBS, there is clearly much merit in theappeal process that I have identified as a way forward. Icannot think of any arguments against such a simpleway forward.
Guy Opperman (Hexham) (Con): I suggest that there
is middle ground on that point. Ministers would probablybe nervous of encouraging excessive litigation and theescalation of legal costs, but it is not beyond the wit ofman for an independent mediator to be brought in toaddress key cases, as is tried in other parts of thedispute resolution system.
Guto Bebb: I accept that point, but I stress that if an
independent reviewer of another bank has been approvedby the FCA—the scheme is a voluntary, not a judicialone—I seriously do not think that going down such anavenue would create cost. The FCA ’s current view isthat if a client is not happy with a decision made by abank and its independent reviewer, then it can resort tolaw, but the whole reason for establishing the redressscheme was to save small businesses that cannot affordto go to law.
I want to talk in detail about consequential losses.
When the redress scheme was announced back in 2013,it was made very clear that the scheme was for consequentiallosses and interest payable. The Financial Services Authority,as the FCA then was, highlighted that consequentiallosses would be determined by reference to the generallegal principles relevant to claims in tort or for breachof statutory duties.
I have already given the figures. It is more than
acceptable and very welcome that £305 million has beenpaid out in relation to interest at 8%, but only £5 millionhas been paid out in consequential loss claims. Part ofthe redress scheme has therefore completely fallen down.I have seen case after case of well-argued and reasonableclaims for consequential losses from businessesacknowledged to have been mis-sold and as a result tohave lost millions of pounds in turnover, but when adetailed claim that will have cost a significant amount ismade the response from the banks is a simple no.
Christopher Pincher (Tamworth) (Con): I congratulate
my hon. Friend on securing this debate. Does he notagree that the loss to companies is much larger thansimple consequential losses? We are talking about small481 482
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Christopher Pincher]
firms, with just a few employees, who are grappling with
the banks and the redress system. In my constituency, athree-man outfit has been grappling with Lloyds fornearly two years. Whenever they correspond with Lloydsit takes perhaps half a month to get through all thepaperwork, which has a real impact on their ability todevelop and build their business.
Guto Bebb: I agree. The scheme was described as one
in which businesses would not need professional advice.Yet when a consequential loss claim is made, either by abusiness or by a business with the support of legal orprofessional advisers, banks time and again respondwith the support of legal and accountancy firms. Theprocess for consequential losses is therefore very unequal.
Martin Horwood (Cheltenham) (LD): Will the hon.
Gentleman give way?
Guto Bebb: I will take one final intervention on this
point; if I took any more I would be in trouble withMadam Deputy Speaker.
Martin Horwood: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman
for the campaign he has fought and for his support forthe Bully-Banks campaign, which also deserves credit.One of my constituents, who thinks that his businesshas suffered hundreds of thousands of pounds ofconsequential losses, has told me that 90% of consequentialloss claims have been rejected. Does the hon. Gentlemanagree that that does not truly reflect the real situation?
Guto Bebb: I agree entirely, and that is why we need a
review of the current redress scheme.
My final point, which the Government could respond
to positively, concerns the decision by HMRC to taxredress received by businesses. HMRC has decided totreat any redress received as income generated in theyear in question, which means that many small businesseswill pay tax on that redress at their marginal tax rate.Has HMRC taken seriously the possibility of usingextra statutory concession D33, paragraph 11, whichstates:
“A right of action may be acquired in a situation where it is not
possible to identify a separate underlying asset. For example,where a professional adviser has given misleading advice on a taxor other financial matter, or in relation to private or domesticmatters…Broadly, when we are looking at capital sums withoutan underlying asset which fall within paragraph 11 of ESC D33we are looking at a financial loss, for example compensation forpoor professional advice or for mis-selling of financial products.”?
In effect, that means that when the compensation is
for bad financial advice or mis-selling a financial product,it should be treated not as income but as a gain forcapital gains tax purposes, which would be a fairerresolution. Currently, banks are able to offset any redresspaid for their tax purposes, although businesses end uppaying tax on any redress they receive. It is unacceptablethat the wrongdoers get tax relief while the wrongedhave to pay tax on their compensation, and I ask theMinister to consider that point.
I wanted to touch on businesses sold in embedded
swaps. If the advice from the FCA is comprehensive, Iappeal to it to make it public. Those businesses are inlimbo. They believe they have a right to be in the redressscheme and are told that legal advice is clear. I call on
the FCA to make that advice available so that thosebusinesses know what possibilities they have when tryingto resolve their situation. [Interruption.] The hon. Member
for Wyre Forest (Mark Garnier) seems to want tointervene.
Mark Garnier: I am grateful for that prompted
intervention. My hon. Friend refers to legal advicegiven to the FCA, but it is clear that these are unregulatedproducts and therefore the FCA is not addressing them.It could be argued that selling an unregulated productto a non-professional customer is a regulated activityand should be covered by regulated activity rules. Thereis a lot of confusion about that.
Guto Bebb: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that
intervention.
It is fair and right to acknowledge that the redress
scheme has been better than no action whatsoever, butconcerns clearly remain. Action is required on consequentiallosses, and there is no justification for refusing aninternal appeals process within the review process. Thelack of transparency allows people to make assumptionsabout the behaviour of banks and the FCA, which isdamaging to the financial system, and more transparencywould give greater confidence in the way the schemeworks. HMRC needs to address the issue of taxingredress paid to businesses with a degree of sympathythat has not so far been shown.
Crucially, allegations about the behaviour of some
banks in the scheme should be a cause for concern notjust to Members of the House but to those on theGovernment and Opposition Front Benches. The issuemust be considered carefully, which is why the motionasks for consideration to be given to the establishmentof a review of the current redress scheme. If the regulatoris unable to regulate the scheme it has established andmake right the wrongs committed by the banks, it isimportant for the Government to take responsibility.
Several hon. Members rose—
Madam Deputy Speaker (Mrs Eleanor Laing): Order.
Several Members are trying to catch my eye and wehave limited time available. I am therefore obliged tointroduce a 10-minute time limit on Back-Bench speeches.
1.44 pm
Paul Farrelly (Newcastle-under-Lyme) (Lab): I want
to talk about one of my local businesses, DK Motorcycles,which has been badly let down not only by its formerbank, the Royal Bank of Scotland, but by the FinancialConduct Authority and the partial scheme of redressover the mis-selling of interest rate products. Havingfinally escaped the clutches of RBS, this is the first timethat the firm has felt confident enough to allow me totalk about its experiences in public, and its generalmanager, Ewan MacDonald, is sitting in the Gallerytoday, alongside many people from small businesseswho feel bullied by their banks and let down by regulators.
DK Motorcycles entered into a 10-year LIBOR swap
with RBS in August 2008, but there was nothing voluntaryabout it. The swap was an express condition of refinancing,but as interest rates fell, it later became clear how theenforced sale had exposed DK, like many other businesses,483 484
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schemeto a penal interest burden. By the time DK had extricated
itself from RBS’s clutches at the end of last year, it hadshelled out in interest and penalty charges more than athird of the original loan of just over £2.4 million.
In May last year, I wrote to the chief executive of the
FCA with concerns about the grounds on which DKhad been excluded from the redress scheme. At thattime, the company was in the hands of the now infamousglobal restructuring—for which read “destruction”—groupat RBS and was staving off a scenario where RBSwould put in one of its pet consultancies, which was, asso often, an insolvency firm, and for which DK wouldinevitably pay to watch the vultures feast.
On the redress scheme, my concerns were about the
so-called sophistication tests and the limited lessonsthat the FCA had learned in findings from its pilotreview. The redress scheme has excluded 10,500 of the30,000 sales of so-called hedging products, on the groundsthat such firms were sophisticated and therefore eitherknew or should have known what they were doing, orthat they would have the wherewithal to go to court ifthe banks failed to deal properly with their complaints.None of that, sadly, applies to a business like DKMotorcycles.
Steve Baker (Wycombe) (Con): I congratulate my
hon. Friend the Member for Aberconwy (Guto Bebb)on securing this debate. On the point raised by the hon.Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Paul Farrelly),businesses in my constituency have still not had explainedto them how the charges are calculated. Does he agreethat that is another area where the banks have failed,because it is clear that they have sold a product thateven now is not well understood?
Paul Farrelly: Indeed, not only have the banks failed
but the regulators have failed to show their teeth. Indeed,in the recent judgment on Crestsign the courts haveonly added to the uncertainty, and it behoves theGovernment to try to clear that up.
DK Motorcycles runs the largest motorcycle showroom
in the country, selling high-value items from a singlepremises. It is a partnership, owned by father and sonDerek and Kevin Neesam—hence the DK. At the timeof the refinancing in 2008, it had a bookkeeper but nota specialist finance director. Ewan, the general manager,joined later and now looks after finance, as well asrunning the showroom. By no stretch of imaginationcould DK be called “financially sophisticated” in aworld of complex derivative products. However, by dintof employing up to 75 people—both full and parttime—and having a business turnover of £20 million, itfailed two of the FCA ’s tests. In response to the pilot,the FCA admittedly amended some of its tests, but noflexibility was applied to the turnover test. As I pointedout to the FCA, that caught different types of businessesindiscriminately and left businesses such as DK bracketedtogether with the likes of BP or BT as so-calledsophisticated, and therefore with no help against predatorybanks such as RBS.
There was a further iniquity in the redress scheme, as
the campaigning group Bully-Banks has repeatedly pointedout, because under the scheme, banks have a get out.Notwithstanding the tests, if they can offer evidencethat a business was financially sophisticated, it wouldbe excluded from the review. However, there was noreciprocal ability for businesses like DK—a father and
son partnership that just happened to be successful andpassionate about selling motorbikes—to offer evidencesuggesting the contrary.
I did not get a reply directly from the chief executive
of the FCA. Instead, at the end of June 2013, a replycame from Christina Sinclair, then acting director ofretail banking in the supervision division. The reply didnot tell us any more than we already knew, and it stillstressed DK’s ability to lodge a complaint with RBSdirectly. Ms Sinclair singularly missed the point madeby DK and many other businesses that, given theirexperiences so far, they were frankly petrified of makinga formal complaint for fear that the bank would pull theplug on the business. From what I have seen of RBS,they were right to be frightened.
In the interim, DK, like me and all hon. Members in
the Chamber, had seen the Tomlinson report and all thestories about the global restructuring group into whichDK had been shunted. At the end of last year, DKfinally found alternative bankers who were willing totake a proper, unsullied credit decision, but as a partingshot, RBS, in the form of their so-called relationshipmanager, the inaptly named Vicky Smart of the globalrestructuring group, said it did not want any of DK’sbusiness any more and withdrew crucial direct debitsupport for DK’s customer finance arm. Fortunately,DK managed to overcome that apparent act of spiteand the new bank put alternatives in place. RBS hascontinued to deal with DK in that way, refusing anymeetings about redress and insisting on communicatingthrough lawyers.
Steve Rotheram: It will be cold comfort to DK that
the sorry tale my hon. Friend outlines is almost a mirrorimage of what has happened to a business in myconstituency. I am sure other hon. Members will extolthe virtues of companies that have also fallen foul ofRBS. As I suggested to the hon. Member for Aberconwy(Guto Bebb), does my hon. Friend think that it is adisgrace that the very banks that caused the financialcrash benefit from selling sophisticated derivatives toorganisations that did not fully appreciate what theywere getting into?
Paul Farrelly: It is indeed a disgrace. RBS has form
not only outside the House, but inside it. The Chair ofthe Treasury Committee recently said that the bank hadmisled it. He said:
“If this is how RBS deals with a parliamentary committee,
how much can customers and regulators rely on it to be straightforwardwith them?”
Jonathan Edwards (Carmarthen East and Dinefwr)
(PC): The hon. Gentleman makes an important pointon refinancing. One of the main difficulties that myconstituents, Mr and Mrs Bartels, got into was that theywere unable to refinance their mortgages as a result ofthe interest rate swap on their current mortgage, whichled to the demise of their business. That is not addressedin the redress scheme.
Paul Farrelly: Given the cash flow difficulties of firms
such as DK and penal interest rate payments, they haveproblems financing their work in progress and stock.DK had to retrench, through which jobs were lost.485 486
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Paul Farrelly]
Fortunately, it is now back on its feet and successful
again, but it is allowing me to share its experiencebecause so many other businesses are afraid of sharingtheirs, for different reasons.
By September last year, when the FCA replied to my
follow-up letter, in which I reiterated those fears, ChristinaSinclair had gone—she had joined a bank as a seniormember of compliance, in the latest twist in the regulatormerry-go-round. The reply was from her successor,Andrew Giles, who, I believe, is still the FCA ’s actingdirector of retail banking and therefore responsible forthe scheme. His response to what we might call the fearfactor was as follows:
“If having submitted a complaint to RBS, DKM has evidence
of the bank attempting to penalize the business, DKM shouldsend it to us… We would consider this in the context of our widerwork in this area and in particular in relations to our ongoingsupervision of RBS. Unfortunately”—
here is the clincher—
“due to confidentiality restrictions, we would not be able to sayhow we have used the information provided.”
What a great backbone stiffener that is for a small
businesses. It is as useful as a chocolate fire guard, as wesay in the potteries. Yet again, the FCA, as a regulator,is letting down businesses such as DK.
Mr Giles also said that the review did not stop the
likes of DK going through the courts. Having been letdown by the regulators, and having been rebuffed afterasking RBS directly for redress, that was the only optionavailable. DK considered it again and again, but decidednot to go through the courts. It is no longer an option,because the statute of limitations on this sorry sagastarted six years ago and has just run out. The realitywas that DK faced a possible legal bill of £250,000 andpossibly twice that if it lost to RBS. Like many smallbusinesses, it simply could not afford the costs and risksof going to court.
I shall conclude with a few remarks on what DK and
we would like to happen. One key thing is for the FCAto review its scheme for redress from banks. As aregulator, with Government backing, it should pushthrough changes. DK wants to be able to appeal to anindependent assessor against the finding that it was asophisticated customer, just as banks were able to dounder their get-out. When I pressed that with the FCAlast year, Mr Giles said that, had that been allowedfrom the beginning, it would have slowed the processdown and led to lots of small businesses not beingcompensated so quickly. We have seen great progressover the past year, so that argument holds no watertoday, and certainly not if the process completes in June2015. It is not an argument against the regulator or theGovernment acting more effectively in pursuing themis-selling of such damaging products.
As far as RBS and customers such as DK are concerned,
the Government could cut through directly, becauseRBS was bailed out by the taxpayer after its folly andperfidy and is still owned by the taxpayer. All the majorbanks have been tainted by that scandal, but, as theFCA figures show, RBS was by far the worst offender.Of the 15,400 sales at redress offer stage at the end ofSeptember, 7,300—nearly half—belonged to RBS. Thatis just the number of businesses who were admitted andnot excluded from the scheme, not the size of theirexposure.That suggests wholesale pumping of those toxic products
down the RBS sales pipeline. The Government shouldaddress that as the majority owner of the bank. Theyshould force the bank to have fully independent handlingof complaints from customers such as DK that havebeen excluded from the scheme, in the interests ofbusinesses, in the interests of a thorough clearing of thestables and in the interests of the future of RBS andtherefore of the taxpayer when it is finally sold off.
My final thought is on consistency and the different
attitudes of banks to the review. Given the scale ofRBS’s participation in the scandal, the Governmentshould satisfy themselves, before RBS is sold off, thatthey are reserving the costs of its mis-selling in a waythat reflects the reality of its involvement.
1.57 pm
Karen Lumley (Redditch) (Con): I thank my hon.
Friend the Member for Aberconwy (Guto Bebb) forsecuring the debate and for his great work.
I want to highlight the situation of the Parsons
family from my constituency. I met them in October2010. They have suffered hugely having run into cash-flowdifficulties following the start of interest rate swappayments. The Parsons believe that their bank, HSBC,has bypassed the terms of the FCA ’s review into themis-selling of interest rate swaps to deny their businessfair and reasonable consequential loss payments.
The Parsons are a very enterprising family who, as
well as running their family business, have done somuch great work in my local community, particularly insetting up a community benefit society. Elysia, theParsons’s family business, was founded in 1994. It is ageneral partnership between the three siblings, Sebastian,Tabitha and Sophie. It invests and operates businessesthat are ethically driven, with a long-term aim to mutualiseand invest profits in the community. Elysia has a numberof business interests, including a biodynamic farm anda sustainable fair trade clothing company. Until December2013, it was the sole UK distributor for Dr Hauschkaskin care, having held the position for 19 years.
Elysia had a successful relationship with its bank for
15 years. It hesitated to sign up to interest rate swaps,but was persuaded to do so by the bank. Having met thefamily many times, it is no exaggeration to say that theyfeel they have been let down and were out of theirdepth.
HSBC has admitted mis-selling three interest rate
swap hedging products to Elysia. The drop in the LIBORrate led to a £350,000 loss. HSBC put the company intoits loan management unit and took property sales torepay its loan. It forced interest rates up, costing Elysiahundreds of thousands of pounds more, and requiredthe company to spend yet more thousands of poundson advice from accountants. Elysia’s cash starvationimpacted on sales so much that stock ran low. In theend, it cost the family their business, because theirsupplier became tired of the bank being paid in preference.
The Parsons family believe that, throughout that
time, HSBC was attempting to coerce them into sellingtheir family firm. I know the family. The massive effecton their health is clear. One of them is unable to work.It is the feeling of the Parsons family that HSBCdeprived Elysia of its working capital and remorselessly487 488
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schemedestroyed it. The family employed an accountant who
estimated consequential losses of more than £7 million.Guess what HSBC offered them: £27,000.
The House will be aware of the FCA ’s promise to put
customers back in the position they should have been inhad the regulatory failings not occurred. In the case ofmy constituents, that has not happened. The inability topay suppliers has led to a loss of a multimillion poundcontract and some 40 UK jobs in my constituency. TheParsons are angry and frightened for the future of theirfamily, as the business they set up to benefit the communityis being attacked by bankers. It has been said manytimes that small business owners are the backbone ofthis country. We should not allow them to be treatedthis way. People have really suffered and are still suffering.They are calling out for a body with teeth to give themthe redress they deserve. Unfortunately, I am not convincedthat we have that with the FCA.
2.1 pm
Mr Russell Brown (Dumfries and Galloway) (Lab): I
congratulate the hon. Member for Aberconwy (GutoBebb) on what can be classed as nothing less than sheerdetermination in continuing the battle for justice for somany businesses the length and breadth of the country.
I would like to think that we could use the words fair
and equitable today, but this issue is anything but. Isuspect that by the end of my speech I will have come toa point where I support the hon. Gentleman and theall-party group. We have all witnessed a lack of consistencyand a deplorable lack of transparency. We look downon a situation that far too many business people haveexperienced, bringing them to their knees. Many havebeen broken. The fact that there is no appeal process is,quite frankly, unbelievable. People have been put in a“take it or leave it” situation and their plight is just notacceptable in this day and age.
The hon. Gentleman referred to the 10-year cap. This
is a product that no one wanted: it was not sold topeople, but forced on them. The campaigning groupBully-Banks yesterday put out a press release that sumsit all up. It said that more than 90% of sales reviewed bythe banks had been mis-sold. There is no argument: thebanks’ conduct in selling these products was misconduct.Nothing could be clearer.
The first contact I had relating to this whole sad saga
was about six years ago when a constituent came to seeme. I have to admit that, not coming from a financialbackground, I had great difficulty in understandingwhat he was telling me. I have shared this experiencewith others in the House before. This was a guy who,along with his father, had worked for more than 20 yearsin the leisure park industry. Their bank, Barclays bank,had decided to set up a specific arm to offer productsand loans to businesses for investment. After an approachfrom the bank, they decided to take out what turned outto be a hedge. After some time, they were then encouragedto change product. Some of the penalties involved withthat product resulted in pressure to meet payments, andinvestment did not go into the business in the way theythought it would. They went from owning four leisureparks—one in my constituency and three in England—to selling them off one at a time, just to meet thebank’s demands.Eventually, my constituent came to see me to make
me aware that he was now under real pressure. I askedhim whether he needed me to contact the bank, but thatwas the last thing he wanted. He was afraid to contactthe bank and make it aware of just what a desperateplight he was in, in case it closed in on him.
Guy Opperman: Does the hon. Gentleman agree that
the reason the FCA redress scheme needs reform is thatthere is no alternative? Like the hon. Gentleman’sconstituents, my constituents who ran a bed and breakfastor a small and medium-sized enterprise could not go tothe bank because of that fear. There is also an inabilityto go to law, because that would mean taking on a verylarge institution with deep pockets that they could notpossibly hope to take on properly. The only way theycan go forward is through the redress scheme, which hasits deficiencies.
Mr Brown: I thank the hon. Gentleman for that
intervention. As I continue this sorry tale, he will seethat the business went into litigation on this issue.
Steve Rotheram: We have heard the word fear on a
number of occasions in this debate. Companies such asthe Flanagan Group felt fearful of what the banksmight do, but fearful, too, of the reputational damagethat might have occurred from an external view of thecompany. Does my hon. Friend think that this is anappropriate way for banks to act?
Mr Brown: We all believe in the role that banks have
in our day-to-day lives, whether as individuals, householdsor businesses. We need to think there is an element oftrust. What we have discovered, however, is that therehas been far too much mistrust. In addition, somesenior people had no idea what their banks were doing.They allowed their managers to carry on selling products,while having no idea of their complexity. One personwho worked for Barclays and sold some of these productscame to meet me. He was in the Penrith area anddecided to come and speak to me about my constituent.He told me that on being introduced to the products,which he was about to sell to customers, he asked hisseniors, “What if this or that question is asked?” He wastold just to move on, because there were no answers.
The long and short of this tale is that the banks
eventually moved in with a team of administrators. Iapproached the administrators to tell them that I thoughtwhat was going on was wrong and that if my constituentwent to court he would win his case. The administratorsmade out that they had to carry on with the businessthey had been pulled in to conduct, and they went aheadwith it. My constituent owed the bank £1.2 million, ofwhich £900,000 was bank charges—an absolute disgrace.As I said to the hon. Member for Hexham (GuyOpperman), my constituent went to court and he wonthe case. But that matters for nothing. Gone is morethan 20 years of a family working together to build abusiness that was going reasonably well but went badlywrong when they were encouraged to take out productsthat they did not really understand, and which thoseselling the products did not really understand either.489 490
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Mr Russell Brown]
I want briefly to mention another, more recent, case
relating to another constituent in the far west of myconstituency, down in Stranraer. This is a really tragiccase. People and businesses do not just have problemswith the banks. There are other issues lying in hidingtoo and some relate to Her Majesty’s Revenue andCustoms. This gentleman told me:
“For the last 6 years I have been a victim of the mis-selling of
an IRHP SWAP Termed Business Loan.”
The last three years, in particular, had been very difficult.
He had been fighting off the bank that had been battlingwith him because it would not accept that it had mis-soldhim a product. I could tell from the number of occasionsI met him over the last three years that this was reallygetting him down. It got to the stage where he had tosell off his mother’s family home of some 44 years. Hehad remortgaged his own home, incurred legal costsof over £8,000 and had put the family business of over54 years standing in real jeopardy.
My constituent was eventually on the receiving end
of a phone call from the bank to say that it was about tomake him an offer within a two-month period, which ithas now done. However, that offer of some £76,000 goesnowhere near to meeting the cost to him as a familyman who had done nothing else but work morning,noon and night for such a sustained period of time thathe missed his family growing up. The offer put himunder real pressure. On the second last occasion hecame to see me, he was seeking advice but knew inhimself that he was being forced to “take it or leave it”,as I mentioned before. The advice from the bank wasthat this was a “full and final” offer, with no recourse toconsequential losses.
Had my constituent not got involved in this loan, he
would have been building up his business, but it actuallysuffered. He wanted to develop the business and theproperties he had available for rent. All that was put onhold, however, because he was struggling to meet thebank’s regular demands. My constituent has had to goto Revenue and Customs to strike a deal, agreeing thathe would pay the bulk of the V AT he owed and thatbetween now and the end of February everything wouldbe cleared.
Guto Bebb: I hope I am not being greedy in intervening,
but I think it should be placed on record that the “timeto pay” arrangements of HMRC have been very positiveon this issue, but the consequences of the redress schemeare not as positive as expected. The “time to pay”agreements have been taken away in many cases, sothere is a need for the continued support of the bankswhile we try to resolve the situation.
Mr Brown: The hon. Gentleman is absolutely right.
HMRC needs to be a little more patient with ourconstituents and with all of us here who are trying to dowhat is right in standing by our constituents and makingthe case for them. They have come through a traumatictime and they are not out of the woods yet, so theycontinue to need our help. That is why I wrote toHMRC on behalf of my constituent—to offer support,saying that I was quite confident and absolutely convincedthat the issue would be resolved if it would just bepatient.In conclusion, we need an appeal mechanism. Further
consideration needs to be given to bringing those whowere sold embedded swaps who seem to have beenexcluded, at least up until now, back into the system. Ifthere is any means of acquiring someone or a smallorganisation that is independent of what is going onwith the FCA in response to this issue, I would like tosee it happen. It is right for people to get their justdeserts; that is what justice means.
2.13 pm
Sir Edward Garnier (Harborough) (Con): I begin, as
have others, in congratulating my hon. Friend the Memberfor Aberconwy (Guto Bebb) on initiating this debate. Itis sad, as he said, that this is the second or third time hehas had to bring this matter to our attention either onthe Floor of the House or in Westminster Hall. He hasplugged on, and my constituents and I are very gratefulto him.
I have no doubt that all who contribute to the debate
will mention constituency cases. It is right for us to doso. I had originally intended not to mention my constituents’names or the name of the bank with which they had tograpple because I thought it unfair, but since the hon.Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Paul Farrelly) andother hon. Members have already mentioned the bankand because I think the bank is big enough to look afteritself, I shall not shrink from doing so.
My constituents, Bob and Stephanie Hamblin, are
directors of a small property company called HybeckEstates, which they founded in the early 1990s. Theircompanies had banked with RBS for many years sincethe 1980s, and they entered into first one and then asecond lending arrangement. Sixty years ago, it mighthave been seen as somewhat unorthodox, but in theconditions that operated in the 1990s and the early partof this century, such arrangements have become increasinglyusual, if not wholly orthodox.
All went well until about 2006, when the bank decided
that the Hamblins and their company needed to restructureits existing hedging arrangements, and the bankrecommended replacing the second loan arrangementwith a swap, a collar or a knock-in collar on the basisthat this would reduce the company’s quarterly premiumpayments. On 16 February 2006, the bank sold theHamblins a £3.5 million, 10-year amortising base ratecollar.
In August 2012, the company submitted a complaint
regarding the sale of the replacement collar in the contextof the interest rate hedging product mis-selling review,and submitted further written evidence on 28 Januarythis year. The complaint was essentially that the replacementcollar was unsuitable for the company because of therisks involved—risks that were never adequately explainedby the bank. The bank should have allowed the companyto continue with the protection of its earlier arrangements,which would have protected it against the possibilitythat interest rates would rise, without exposing it to therisks inherent in the new replacement collar.
On 1 July this year, the bank wrote a letter to the
company, containing the bank’s provisional offer ofredress. It acknowledged that in the course of the saleof the replacement collar, the explanations it had providedto the company, initially in a crowded pub,
“in respect of the features, benefits or risks of alternative products
did not comply with the standards agreed with the FCA.”491 492 4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeThe bank’s failure to explain the
“features, benefits or risks of alternative products”
also extended to the appropriate alternative strategies,
which were not explained at all. The company’s desirefor premium reduction could have been satisfied in anumber of simple and risk-free ways—but they werenot. The risks were simply not explained. The secondcap—the earlier lending arrangement—exposed thecompany to no risks at all, but the new one exposed it topotential losses of more than £950,000 in the event ofinterest rates falling. That risk was not disclosed to thecompany; neither was the fact that, as a consequence ofthe liability incurred via this collar, the company’s flexibilityto refinance with another bank would be seriouslyimpaired.
It seems reasonable to draw the inference—I am sure
others would concur on the basis of their own constituencyexperiences—that the bank’s poor sales practices weredriven by the additional profit it could make by puttingthe company into this new vehicle. Derivatives pricingexperts calculate that the expected net gain to the bankon the day of the transaction was over £43,000, andit incidentally cost the Hamblins and the company£0.33 million to extract themselves from it this year.The replacement collar, furthermore, is in serious breachof the 7.5% rule announced by the FCA at the outset ofthe review. This collar exposed the company to potentiallosses of very nearly £1 million—equivalent to 27% ofthe amount notionally hedged, which is almost fourtimes higher than the stated 7.5% maximum.
Given these circumstances in which the bank has
acknowledged that it neither explained the risks of thenew collar, nor offered any of the simple premium-reducingstrategies outlined above, the bank’s conclusion that thecompany
“would have chosen a vanilla collar in any event”
is clearly absurd.
Here we have a company that has been in the property
business for some little while, and a director of thatcompany who knows something about—indeed, quite alot about—the financial services industry, but is not anexpert on hedging. To suggest that he would exposehimself, his wife and his company to a product thatwould place them in such dire jeopardy is absurd.Nevertheless, the bank has concluded—through its internalreview process, which has been validated by the FCA ’sindependent review system—that they are not entitledto redress. The bank has made an admitted mistake andhas caused admitted consequential loss, but it has said“Y ou would have bought one of these anyway, so wewill not pay you any compensation.”
Guy Opperman: I am following the case of my hon.
and learned Friend’s constituent with interest, becauseit is very similar to cases that I have encountered in myconstituency. If, like me, my hon. and learned Friendhas met senior managers at RBS—the bank that isinvolved in both our constituents’ cases—he will knowthat while they are very keen to resolve these cases, themiddle managers who are dealing with the individualclaims that are being assessed seem incapable of acceptingthe principle that they were at fault and are to blame.The Government ought to make it clear to seniormanagement at RBS that they must ensure that there istrue accountability in their own organisation.Sir Edward Garnier: I could not agree more. The
banks and the FCA must take responsibility for whatthey have done, and if that requires the urging of theTreasury, please let that happen. These banks are makingvast amounts of money, and although I am a Conservativecapitalist and like companies to make profits, I expectthem to behave properly.
Paul Farrelly: Do the hon. and learned Gentleman’s
constituents feel that they were advised by the bank totake on that collar? I ask because in the recent Crestsigncase it was found that a company had been advised byRBS, but the bank was none the less allowed to rely onits disclaimer that it has not given advice. Does the heagree that that legal position only compounds theuncertainty and the risks posed to businesses that takethe banks on?
Sir Edward Garnier: I will not comment on the legalities
or illegalities involved in that specific case, but I will sayin relation to the case to which I have referred that thebank not only failed to explain the risks of moving intoa new loan vehicle fully, properly and candidly, butsubsequently sought to hide its own responsibilities forits failures. Such action, besides being—in my view—immoral, lowers not just the trust and confidence thatsmall businesses should have in the retail banking sector,but the collective confidence of Members of Parliament,who should hold the Government to account for thosefailures if they are such, and if they occurred on theGovernment’s watch.
Ann McKechin (Glasgow North) (Lab): Another
problem, which has been described to me by a constituent,is the fact that the documents with which the internalreviewer is provided by the bank are not necessarily madeavailable to customers or their own advisers, unless afreedom of information or data request is submitted.The lack of transparency in the way in which the reviewis carried out, and the inability of customers to correctthe information that is given to the reviewer, constitutesanother failure in the system.
Sir Edward Garnier: I agree, and that reflects what
happened in the case that I have described. If there isanything that ought to be done—and the motion dealswith this—the transparency of the banks, and hencetheir accountability, should be increased. It is no goodthe independent reviewer saying “Nothing to see, domove on”, because there is plenty to see. It is simply aquestion of being able to find it, expose it, and reach properconclusions, either at law or as a matter of reasonableinference from what has gone on.
There is too much lack of candour, too much
obfuscation, and too much dissembling. It is high timethat the FCA lived up to its responsibilities; it is hightime—I must say this to my hon. Friend the EconomicSecretary, who has done a sterling job since entering theGovernment—that the Treasury leant on the FCA rathermore heavily than it may have done in the past; and itis high time that the FCA, this new body, stoppedpulling its punches with the salespeople, whether theyare operating in pubs or in banking offices, in order toensure that honest dealing is what we get from ourbanks.493 494
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme2.25 pm
Mark Reckless (Rochester and Strood) (UKIP): It is
a privilege to follow the hon. and learned Member forHarborough (Sir Edward Garnier). He said that theTreasury should be leaning on the Financial ConductAuthority. I wonder where the Financial Conduct Authorityitself should be leaning, because it has a considerableincentive to get this right.
We are talking about a precedent-setting voluntary
redress scheme. In theory, if there is a class of customerswho have not been treated fairly by the banks contraryto their regulatory principles, it would seem a good ideato establish a voluntary scheme to identify those whoare in that class, the quantum of their loss, and theproper way in which to compensate them. If such casescan be dealt with in that way, rather than via theombudsman or the courts, there is scope for significantcost savings and also, potentially, for a fair and propersystem. However, there appear to have been a numberof operational problems.
Schemes such as this require a degree of timeliness.
Members have referred to the six-month delay in theassessment of the scheme. The purpose of the delayedassessment was to ensure consistency, but it appears tohave failed, certainly given the approach of one bank,RBS, which has already been mentioned by severalMembers. If there is to be a voluntary system, it needsto have the confidence of the banks which are voluntarilyparticipating in it, as well as the confidence of customers.Unless there is consistency—if one bank is allowed toget away with not compensating in a number of areasin which other banks are compensating—neither thisnor future schemes will have the confidence of users orproviders.
There also needs to be transparency, in relation to the
principles of the scheme and how it will operate, butalso in relation to the information that is provided. Oneof the main problems is the fact that the scheme isoperating a black box. The customers and their adviserswho have the most knowledge of the circumstancesinvolved are unable to make a judgment on whether it isin the customers’ interests to enter the scheme in the firstplace, or on whether they are being dealt with properlywithin it. They are also unable to provide informationthat might correct misjudgments, because such informationis not shared between the independent assessor, or thebank, and the end customer who is seeking compensation.May I ask the Economic Secretary why that informationis not shared? Would this not be a better voluntaryredress scheme, and a better model for other potentialschemes, were it to be shared appropriately?
Consequential loss is a particularly important issue,
which has arisen in a constituency case of mine. Itseems that what was said about the operation of thescheme and the availability of consequential loss hasnot come to pass. At some point in the design of thescheme and in attempts to ensure its consistency, adecision seems to have been made—or, at least, a practiceseems to have has developed—whereby virtually allconsequential loss claims are turned down, or are paidto a vanishingly small degree.
According to information given to me by Berg, of the
1,535 cases that have been assessed for the purposes ofconsequential loss, 871 have received no consequentialloss redress. Of those that have, 502 have receivedbetween £1 and less than £10,000, 51 have received
between £10,000 and £100,000, and just 11 have receivedmore than £100,000. I understand that a further casehas been settled between a charity and RBS, partlythanks to the intervention of a Member of Parliamentyesterday.
It is very difficult to make a proper decision on
whether to enter the scheme if information is not shared,and if statements made about consequential loss arenot borne out. As many Members know, there is limitedcompetition for small businesses in the banking market.However, what has become clear to me, as I have lookedat this game in a particular case, is the extent to whichbusinesses are locked in by the nature of the swapproduct, and then locked further by dispute or litigationrelating to that product. While in some areas a businessmight be able to go to a different supplier, that is almostimpossible to do in many circumstances where a swaphas been sold and then a dispute has developed later asto that swap.
The business I seek to draw attention to today is Port
Medway Marina Ltd in my constituency of Rochesterand Strood, next to the village of Cuxton. David andNeil Taylor, a father and son team, have built up anddeveloped that business, but have been held back in anextraordinary way by their bank and a dispute over aswap entered into. I do not want to speak negativelyabout that bank, which in this case is Barclays. I havehad positive dealings with Barclays on constituencymatters. I opened its impressive new branch on Chathamhigh street, and more generally it can be said that it isnot like RBS or Lloyds HBOS. It did not get thetaxpayer bail-out. There is a huge difference betweenhaving some temporary guarantees and taking tens ofbillions of pounds of taxpayers’ money. Barclays didnot take that, and it deserves credit for that, and I lookto it to be reasonable in its dealings with this set ofconstituents, as in other dealings I have had with it. Itmay be the redress scheme that is causing the problems,rather than the relationship there might otherwise be.
Roger Williams (Brecon and Radnorshire) (LD): The
hon. Gentleman is being complimentary about Barclays,but as I understand it Barclays is one of two banks thatwill not pay out any redress unless the company involvedalso agrees to the consequential loss. That is ratherunfair, particularly when those businesses are in urgentneed of financial support.
Mark Reckless: I was not aware that Barclays was
one of only two banks in that category. I am talkingabout a particular instance involving my constituents.They have an award, including interest, of £140,000,but they are only allowed to get that £140,000 if theygive up their claim for consequential loss. As the hon.Gentleman says, that is unfair and I would encourageBarclays to look at that again, but also to look at thespecifics of the case involving Port Medway MarinaLtd. I understand generally why banks will lean againstconsequential loss claims. They will be nervous thatthose consequential losses could expand unpredictably.It is also easy for a business to think, “If only we hadhad this money, we could have done that,” and makeassumptions that things would have gone well and havean optimistic view as to that opportunity. There arealso cases where people take advantage, as we have seen495 496
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schemewith BP, particularly in respect of claims in the United
States, but we could not be further from that situationhere, and Barclays in particular has been able to revisedown its provision, not least because it seems that it ispaying very little, if anything, in the way of consequentialloss claims.
The particulars of this business are unique. In 1990
David Taylor managed to find and purchase 30 acres ofderelict riverfront boatyard adjoining Cuxton. He tookquite some risk in doing that, and he has had to gothrough quite a lot of difficulties in planning arrangementsand in getting the right permissions to develop hisbusiness, and now that of his son. At one point thiscompany was employing 16 or 17 people, but there arenow just seven people. Some £25,000 annually of interesthas been taken out of what would otherwise be cashavailable to that firm—an amount that could service aloan upwards of £250,000. The absence of that capital,and the inability to go to another bank while this swapwas in action and was being disputed, has preventedthat business from growing in very serious ways. Usuallythere is a relatively competitive market in terms ofopportunities, and if money is available we would expectother people to come in and, as it were, compete awaythe returns available. In this case, however, the 30 acresof prime riverside frontage to have dry docks, to storeboats and to maintain and develop those boats is anextraordinary resource, because since 1990 the developmentof the property market particularly along the banks ofthe Thames has been such that there is no longer theprevious great surplus of wharves and places to havedry docks and to look after boats in that way. Anymoney available to the owners of those sites to redevelophas largely gone on residential use of those river frontageareas, as huge amounts of money can often be madefrom residential development. That has meant that suchsites have become almost unavailable along the Thames.To find a facility of comparable size to the 25 to30 acres of available land that Port Medway MarinaLtd has in my constituency, we would have to go almostaround East Anglia or all the way down to Southampton.The Taylors therefore have a huge business opportunitythere, but it is being stopped, or very significantlyhindered and slowed down, in its development by themis-selling of this loan and the unavailability of finance,specifically in respect of a 65-tonne boat hoist that hasbeen bought but which cannot be installed without anew dry dock, so the company only has a 25-tonnehoist. That difference is absolutely huge for a companyof this sort, and it is the bankers who are responsible forthe non-availability of the finance to develop that andthe huge business opportunities that would otherwisehave been available to this company.
I would like to see this company continue and thrive.
With finance, I believe it can. Barclays has admitted, Ibelieve—or it is not disputed—that this was mis-sold asa swap. The relationship manager said it was a conditionof the loan when it was not, and that manager has nowleft the company. I ask that bank to have a sensible lookat this scheme and to allow this business in my constituencyto grow and thrive in the way that it deserves to.
2.36 pm
Mr Marcus Jones (Nuneaton) (Con): I thank my hon.
Friend the Member for Aberconwy (Guto Bebb) for thework and effort he has put into this issue not just onbehalf of his constituents but on behalf of people who
have been wronged by the banks up and down thecountry. He has done a fabulous job and we should allcongratulate him on that.
I recall the initial debate in this Chamber on this
important subject. I spoke about a business in myconstituency that had been badly disadvantaged as aresult of an interest-rate hedging product. The productin question was not just mis-sold by their bank; it wasalmost forced on my constituents by their bank. I wastherefore extremely pleased when following that initialdebate the FCA announced the redress scheme. Theaims of the redress scheme suggested it would tick theboxes for my constituents—do the job and put myconstituents back in the position they were in before theswap product was mis-sold to them.
It is important that we look at what the FCA scheme
says in this regard. It states that the scheme provides for“fair and reasonable” redress, which
“means putting the customer back into the position they would
have been in had the regulatory failings not occurred, includingany consequential loss.”
So the FCA had in fact set a very high test, which in
principle was the right and proper thing to do. It was atest that, if properly applied, would surely lead to a fairoutcome for my constituents and many people similarlyaffected. In practice the FCA scheme has worked up toa point, but it has not gone anywhere near satisfying itsoriginal aims.
I shall deal with the issue of simple damages, which,
on the whole, I believe has worked well. Most of thebanks have agreed to pay simple damages and deal withthe issue of consequential loss separately. There are twoexceptions, however. One of those two banks is myconstituent’s bank, Barclays, which has refused to dothat. It has refused to deal with consequential lossseparately. I will go into more detail in a moment aboutwhy that decision to link simple damages and consequentialloss is so unfair, but first I would just like to touch onthe mechanism that has been put in place for businessesto challenge the decisions of their banks regardingconsequential loss. Again, I quote the relevant passagefrom the FCA scheme:
“All customers who receive a basic redress offer have the
opportunity to make a claim for consequential loss…To facilitatethis, banks are offering support for customers, for example, byproviding guidance to help customers put their claims together.
Banks are also being pragmatic and customer-centric when
customers ask for more time to put together their claims and willconsider reasonable requests for extensions on a case by casebasis…All claims are being assessed by independent reviewers. Ifclaims are rejected, banks are providing constructive feedback sothat…customers may be able to provide additional informationto support their claims.”
My constituents, taking the FCA at its word, contacted
their bank, Barclays, for information to help themascertain their consequential loss. This information tookthe form of requesting a schedule to show what additionalloan repayments and charges they had paid by takingthe swap rather than staying on their original product.Initially there were positive noises from the bank, butthe information never materialised, despite repeatedrequests for it. My constituents then decided that thebest way to deal with this would be to have their caseindependently reviewed, as per the scheme. They werenot told by Barclays that their case had already beenreviewed, and to their dismay their review had been497 498
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Mr Marcus Jones]
closed by Barclays. In essence, they were told by Barclays,
“Take the simple redress, take the 8% or go to law.” I amnot sure whether the review was independent—severalright hon. and hon. Members have mentioned thatissue. There was no report, no detail of who the reviewwas carried out by and no detail of why my constituentswere incorrect in their assertions. There was no transparencyin this process whatsoever. I questioned this with theFCA, which did no more than back up the actions ofBarclays—the whole arrangement between Barclays andthe FCA seemed very cosy. At best I would say the FCAscheme was inadequate, but at worst I would say it wascompletely toothless.
This situation has, unfortunately, left my constituents
having to pay the up-front cost to employ an expert tocalculate consequential loss. They have also had nochoice but to incur the up-front costs involved in consideringwhether litigation was economical or not. Now, 12 monthsfrom the initial offer made by Barclays, they are leftwith a choice: take on a David and Goliath fight withBarclays, without even the simple damages to help themfacilitate it, or capitulate, taking the simple damagesand the 8% for consequential loss and suffering theongoing losses because they have not been put backinto the position they were in originally. To a smallbusiness, such as the one I am talking about, that isHobson’s choice: they have no choice whatsoever. Givenwhat I have heard from right hon. and hon. colleagues, Iam sure that this case is not unique; this is happening upand down the country, not just with Barclays, but withother banks.
Daniel Kawczynski (Shrewsbury and Atcham) (Con):
I have two companies in my constituency that I amparticularly concerned about, Regal Fayre and BennettHoldings. I very much hope that my hon. Friend willagree that Members of Parliament have come to takepart in this debate, so the Minister and her team shouldtake a specific interest in each of the cases.
Mr Jones: I thank my hon. Friend for his invention,
and I will address that issue in a moment. I know thatmy hon. Friend the Economic Secretary takes a considerableinterest in this and I am sure she will take that interestfurther as a result of what she has heard today. Peoplesuch as his constituents and mine need action. One wayin which they could get the redress would be if thesepeople were properly protected under the umbrella ofthe ombudsman. My constituents qualify for the criteriaof the ombudsman scheme, but the maximum awardof damages the ombudsman can offer is completelyinadequate. I have spoken to the Minister on a numberof occasions and at some length about that. Manypeople are going to the ombudsman and finding that itis recommending damages above and beyond what itcan impose. I am aware that some banks are willing tohonour that, but I am also aware that in many situationsbanks are not willing to honour what the ombudsman issaying. That brings us back to the point about inconsistencyraised right at the start of this debate by my hon. Friendthe Member for Aberconwy.
At the moment, I would probably give the FCA five
out of 10—some people may think I am being generous—inachieving its aims under the scheme. If the FCA and theGovernment want to get 10 out of 10 in the eyes of myconstituents, the FCA needs to have more teeth—if it
does not have the power to deal with these issues. Theyneed to make sure that a number of things happen.First, they need to make sure that all banks decouplethe payment of simple damages from the matter ofconsequential loss. They also need to compel banksproperly to assist their customers to assess their loss.
Guto Bebb: Although the FCA scheme says there is
no need to get professional advice to help with theconsequential loss claims, the evidence seems to suggestthat the people who have taken on such advice have abetter outcome than those who have not. Is that notanother example of inconsistencies?
Mr Jones: My hon. Friend is absolutely right about
that. The issue of consequential loss is reasonably simplein some cases but extremely complex in others. Even inthe most simple cases it is difficult for the peopleinvolved. We must not forget that they are “non-sophisticated customers” and it is difficult for them toassess their loss, so they should be helped in that.
Let me highlight a number of other things that must
happen to make sure that people are satisfied that theyhave had a fair deal from this process. There needs to befar more transparency in the review process, for thereasons mentioned by right hon. and hon. Members.The banks need to be compelled to divulge the identityof the reviewer, and all the correspondence and othersupporting documentation in relation to that reviewprocess. There also needs to be a review of the maximumlevel of compensation the FCA can award, to makesure that all small businesses are truly protected withouthaving to go to law.
Finally, my hon. Friend raised an extremely important
point about the tax treatment of people who getcompensation. I know that the Government have alreadyset a precedent in this regard; it may have been not forcommercial loss suffered, but in relation to the EquitableLife scandal, which this Government have done theirbest to clear up. The payments made by my right hon.Friend the Chancellor to people affected by that scandalhave not affected recipients’ tax positions. It is extremelyimportant that we look carefully at this to make surethat the same applies in this regard.
This issue is about fairness; it is about fair redress for
the loss that people have suffered. That redress can befair only if the FCA scheme and the ombudsman cantruly put people affected by this scandal back in theposition they were in before they were mis-sold theseawful interest rate hedging products.
2.47 pm
Mr Mark Williams (Ceredigion) (LD): I would say it
is a pleasure to speak in this debate, Madam DeputySpeaker, but I wonder whether it really is. We have hadthree of these debates so far and, sadly, they have beenenriched by the experiences right across the country ofour long-suffering constituents. My contribution will beno different in bringing some of those experiences tothe attention of the House, but I particularly wish toaddress the issue of fixed-rate loans—tailored businessloans, as they are known in some quarters—how dangerousand toxic those products are, and how they remainexcluded from the FCA review, an anomaly that shouldbe addressed.499 500
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFirst, however, it would be remiss of me not to
congratulate, again, my hon. Friend the Member forAberconwy (Guto Bebb), the all-party group he foundedand Bully-Banks. I shudder to think where we would bewithout him and those who were galvanised into foundingBully-Banks to push the agenda forward. It wouldchurlish if I did not at the start of my contributionacknowledge, as my hon. Friend did, the record of theredress scheme in so far as it is a redress scheme,but today’s motion clearly spells out our sense ofdisappointment. More than that, it highlights our feelingsabout the inertia, helplessness and heartbreak expressedby many of the small business owners who have beenmis-sold these products in the cases we are all dealingwith.
I have spoken in this Chamber before about one
business in my Ceredigion constituency, and I will do soagain. I can see at least two or three former Aberystwythstudents here who will know the business in question.The asset-rich farms, hotels and pubs in my constituency,which is dependent on agriculture and tourism, werevery clearly targeted by the banks. There was a timewhen the trickle of cases that came into my surgeriesreached torrent proportions. There were many, manycases of people coming to see me. Clearly, the policieshad a direct impact on the employment base of myconstituency, reliant as it is on seasonal trade. If there isthe prospect of three or four large hotels closing downin a constituency, it is a very serious matter.
I have mentioned the case of Mr Mansel Beechey, the
licensee of the Hen Llew Du Public House in Bridgestreet, Aberystwyth, and I want to continue to use hisexample. The fact that it is an unresolved case speaksvolumes. He made a complaint to the bank about themis-sale of his tailored business loan, an unregulatedproduct, back in April 2012. It took Clydesdale andY orkshire Bank well over six months to respond to thatformal written complaint and, despite the efforts of myoffice facilitating meetings with some of its most seniorpersonnel, the matter remains unresolved. Dither, delayand prevarication are the watchwords of its game. Itsmost recent excuse was that matters could not be progressedbecause of staff leave. That was at the beginning ofSeptember. Let us not forget that I am talking about aniconic and once successful business—one that had afuture—being put in jeopardy. The fear is that the bankseeks to put this matter into the long grass.
I refer now to the commendable work of the Treasury
Committee, which conducted a brief inquiry into thismatter. We heard evidence from Mr David Thorburnand Debbie Crosbie of the Clydesdale and Y orkshireBank. The hon. Member for Dundee East (StewartHosie) raised the matter of the TBL sales process andasked Ms Crosbie:
“If a customer is able to identify that that process did not
happen, that that warning was not explicit, that would count as amis-sell would it, in terms of your review?”
Ms Crosbie replied in the affirmative. She said:
“We believe that once you examine that process, and find that
it had not been carried out in accordance with what we hadagreed is appropriate, we would absolutely redress a customer andwe have done so on a number of occasions.”
Ms Crosbie also stated that
“the customer gets a fixed payment for a fixed period of time andthat payment will never change as long as the customer does notwant to terminate the agreement early.”That is the mis-match between what we are told by
managers, the experience of the Select Committee andthe practice on the ground for Mr Beechey and his family.
Given the recent press coverage concerning the National
Australia Bank, the parent bank, issuing a profit warningto Clydesdale and Y orkshire Bank and linking the bankto an imminent disposal, it is not surprising to learnthat this bank drags its feet in addressing mis-sellingissues with potentially dire consequences for some of ourconstituents. It serves its purpose to do so, often allowingthe customers—my businesses in Ceredigion—to teeteron the brink in the hope that Her Majesty’s Revenueand Customs will then move in and finish them off.
I very much concur with what my hon. Friend the
Member for Aberconwy said about the changing attitudeto HMRC as the debate on consequentials has movedon. Sadly, the reality here is that virtually all of Clydesdaleand Y orkshire’s lending was done via tailored businessloans on fixed rates and, as those products fall outsidethe scope of the FCA review, the bank has thus faravoided any effective redress scenario.
My hon. Friend the Member for Nuneaton (Mr Jones)
and others have talked about our despondency—andthe despondency of our constituents—over the role ofthe FCA. When the Financial Services Authority morphedinto the FCA, we were assured that the new organisationwould enforce rules and punish breaches and that itwould focus on the behaviour of financial professionals.In short, we were promised that it would be a truewatchdog. We have looked to the FCA to sort out thismess and to do so in a way that is both fair and timely,but that has not happened. As we have heard from otherMembers, the FCA has still not released comprehensivedetails of what constitutes a mis-sale. The agreementbetween the FCA and the major banks on which thereview process is founded remains a secret agreement.Where is the transparency and fairness for these businessesthat are so badly affected? Where is this protection forcustomers that is supposed to be at the heart of theFCA ’s work?
Mr Henry Bellingham (North West Norfolk) (Con): I
have a business in my constituency that took out afixed-rate tailored business loan, which had a hiddenswap attached to it. The bank is trying to say that it isnot regulated. Surely the key point is one of fairnessand of putting all these people back in the position inwhich they would have been before.
Mr Williams: My hon. Friend is right. It is about
fairness and the implications of these policies. Whetherthe policies were sold independently or hidden in a loanagreement, the implication has been the same. Theywere sold by the same people and so should be includedin any future review.
The redress scheme has excluded a large number of
people. Even before we drill down and thoroughly examinethe scheme, it is hugely significant that a large numberof businesses fall outside it. The scope of the scheme istoo narrow and restrictive. It does not deal with thereality of what has gone on, which means that, as itstands, it will not change or reform bank behaviour orproperly compensate people.
The scheme sets out that
the IRHP Review does not require customers to assess for themselves
whether or not their sale was compliant.”501 502 4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Mr Mark Williams]
If, as the FCA insists, there is no requirement for
disclosure, how can it ever be possible to tell whetherthe banks, in reaching a judgment, are relying on erroneousinformation, or, as I have frequently come across,deliberately not taking information into account?
If the review process is to be transparent and fair,
why is the customer not given a chance to view theevidence that the bank puts forward in the review and, ifthey feel it to be necessary, to have the opportunity tocomment on it? How does the FCA fail to see that therewill always be suspicion and mistrust when the processis shrouded in secrecy, and customers are deprived ofthe opportunity to view the evidence submitted by thebank to the bank’s own review team?
We need to address the controversial matter of the
offer of alternative products. As part of the redress,reviewers seem to be hellbent on suggesting that if myconstituents had not taken out a particular type ofhedging product, they would almost certainly have takenout something similar. Is it now really the case thatproviding customers with an alternative product as partof redress is actually a widely accepted or well-establishedprinciple?
Despite the brief and the impressive statistics, the
FCA is still failing to address the issue of confidence;there remains a crisis of confidence in the bankingindustry. Many people, such as Mansel Beechey and myconstituent in a related matter, David Grant of Llechryd,have deep misgivings about the industry, and this is notjust a matter of justice; in communities such as mine,the small businesses that the Chancellor, the DeputyPrime Minister and the Prime Minister have said are soimportant to our economic recovery need action andassistance. If we do not act, we will fail many of ourconstituents, and it will be to the detriment of us all interms of both justice and the economy.
2.59 pm
Bob Stewart (Beckenham) (Con): It is a pleasure to
follow my hon. Friend the Member for Ceredigion(Mr Williams), who also attended Aberystwyth university.Like him, I commend my hon. Friend the Member forAberconwy (Guto Bebb) for securing this debate andcampaigning on this matter. I think that everyone in theHouse is grateful to him for his efforts.
Many small businesses have suffered as a result of
bank mismanagement, and I wish to highlight justone of them. A constituent of mine, Mr Dean D’Eye,became a customer of the Romford lending division ofNatWest—part of RBS, of course—14 years ago. Hehad investment and property development businesses,and his main contact point with NatWest was a mancalled Ray Pask. Until 2008, Dean D’Eye carried outmany transactions via NatWest. His total lending acrossvarious companies totalled about £11 million, with adebt of about £5.8 million. All interest payments on hisdebts were paid on time, and his business had a verysatisfactory gearing of less than 60%.
After the Lehman bank collapse in September 2008,
however, Dean D’Eye was inundated with additionalrequests for information, which took up a great deal oftime—time off the crucial task of doing business. Thenin December 2008, without warning, NatWest retainedthe £139,000 profit from a property sale, despite havingsent letters confirming it could be used to aid the group’s
cash flow. Thereafter, NatWest mis-sold the swap productsassociated with Dean D’Eye’s business.
In early 2009, while the demands for even more
information continued, Dean D’Eye’s group was placedunder watch by the global restructuring group. Then inApril 2009, the bank sent in administrators from acompany called MCR to report on his business. InDean D’Eye’s view, its subsequent report was engineeredto cause maximum damage, to justify putting his businessinto administration.
Sir Andrew Stunell (Hazel Grove) (LD): I do not
know the details of my hon. Friend’s case, but I couldalmost recite them, given the grave similarities to casesthat have arisen in my constituency. There seems to be apattern, particularly with RBS, of following a trackdesigned to produce a certain outcome, regardless ofthe strength of the business. Does he agree that theFCA should take that into account when looking at theindependent assessments?
Bob Stewart: The point of our producing case studies
is to prove that they are all along the same, incorrectpath.
On 28 May 2009, NatWest formally cancelled Dean
D’Eye’s overdraft, which, considering the size of thebusiness, was small—about £40,000. Within a week, on1 June, all his loans were called in, so that by 10.17 amon 5 June, administrators had full control of the business,which they started running from his office. This decisionmeant the group lost its cash flow, which in turn createda default with Dunbar bank, owned by Zurich InsuranceGroup. Dunbar bank has a reputation for being evenmore ruthless with its customers than NatWest.
As was broadcast on a recent BBC “Panorama”
programme, Lawrence Tomlinson, the Government’sentrepreneur in residence, has exposed the dubiousactivities of NatWest’s GRG department—on that matter,retribution was taken against him as well. The NatWestGRG’s senior managers have at the very least givensome obscure answers to the Treasury Committee. Iunderstand that, since then, some of them have resignedand that the GRG has been disbanded. I gather thatonly 6% of the business adopted by the GRG everre-emerged. That is hardly a success. My constituent,Dean D’Eye, now hopes to get litigation funding, sothat he can take NatWest to court for the way in whichit ruined his business. I cannot say that I blame him fordoing so.
3.4 pm
Mark Garnier (Wyre Forest) (Con): It is a great
pleasure to follow my hon. Friend the Member forBeckenham (Bob Stewart). I should like to add mycongratulations to my hon. Friend the Member forAberconwy (Guto Bebb) on securing the third of thesedebates. This is turning into a running series, although Ihope that we shall not need a further debate on thismatter in the next Parliament because we will haveresolved the issue by that time.
Great progress has been made as a result of the huge
amount of work that my hon. Friend has done, and itshould be recognised that, in many cases, the bankshave stepped up to the plate to handle the problems that503 504
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schemethey have created. However, we have been left with a
cohort of claimants who feel that they are not gettingthe redress they deserve, and I want to concentrate onthem today.
When I consider the plight of those businesses that
have been mis-sold interest rate hedging products, Ihave yet to find a victim for whom I do not haveenormous sympathy. This appalling scandal has destroyedmany people’s lives, including those of people who havenot been directly affected. For example, people havefound themselves out of a job when their employerwent bust as a result of the scandal. Other people havebeen creditors who could not suffer the cash flow shortfallresulting from banks taking too long to make redresspayments, especially consequential loss payments, tothe businesses that owed them money.
The scandal’s implications go far beyond the victims
who were mis-sold swaps, and it is therefore right thatwe should consider the regulator’s response. The responseof the Financial Conduct Authority is incredibly important,not least because this is one of the first full-blownscandals to which it has had to respond. How the newregulator behaves over this scandal will set a precedentfor how it behaves in the future and tell us whether it isfit for purpose.
I want to raise a couple of issues, given that the
regulator has opted for a voluntary redress scheme.That in itself is probably not unreasonable, and it givesthe banks an opportunity to show how they have changedtheir culture and responded to the chaos they havecaused. However, this is a brand new way of respondingto such a crisis, and it must be looked at very carefully.The briefing note that the FCA prepared for this debatestates, in the frequently asked questions section, that thevoluntary approach is different from previous redressschemes, citing speed in compensation. Speedy outcomeshave not been achieved in all cases, however.
It is noteworthy that the regulator cites part of the
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 as a reasonfor not having to make public the arrangements betweenitself and the banks. Any new process needs to be fullytransparent if there is to be confidence in that process.There is no confidence in this process, and the situationis fundamentally flawed.
Bob Stewart: How can anyone possibly think that
there should not be full transparency in this sort ofactivity? I do not understand how the FCA can justifynot being transparent about all its dealings.
Mark Garnier: I am not sure that the FCA can justify
it. The FCA is answerable to Parliament and to theTreasury Committee, and until such time as we canconduct a proper investigation into what it has been upto, how can anyone believe that this is a good system?
Tessa Munt (Wells) (LD): Does the hon. Gentleman
anticipate that the eventual outcome of this completelack of transparency is that the FCA will have to revisitthis whole process, as it has done relatively recently withpayment protection insurance, because so many peoplehave had a very poor deal?
Mark Garnier: The hon. Lady is absolutely right, and
I shall return to that as I make progress through myspeech.My first point is that there is little consistency between
the banks in how they tackle the problems they havecreated. One of the FCA ’s frequently asked questions is:
“Are the offers consistent between banks?”
Interestingly, its response reads:
“The independent reviewers report regularly to the FCA, both
on the judgements they are making and how the banks areperforming, and will regularly bring all the independent reviewerstogether to ensure consistency of approach. The FCA also collectsdata on the offers being made by each bank and we carefullyconsider any variances to ensure that the standards are beingapplied consistently.”
That in itself demonstrates that there is a huge amount
of useful information that we are not getting a chanceto see. It goes on:
“We also regularly select individual case studies to follow up
with banks”.
The FCA is trying to be consistent, but cannot say that
it is being consistent. We have heard on many occasionsthis afternoon about its not being consistent.
My example concerns not one of my constituents but
someone else who came to see me and involves how thebanks treat businesses that have gone into insolvency.Clearly, any insolvent business will have an insolvencypractitioner winding up that business. It is a tragic time,but somebody has to come in and do it. In the event ofan insolvency, the banks are involved both as a creditor,as they have lent money to the business in the first place,and as a debtor, as they owe redress and in many casesconsequential losses to the business. Some banks behavequite well. HSBC is a reasonably good example andrecognises that the insolvency practitioner is duty boundfairly to distribute the assets of an insolvent business toa wide range of creditors. To that end, HSBC will paywhat is owed under the redress and consequential lossscheme into the insolvency practitioner’s funds andthen put in a bid for what it is owed from the originalbank loan. The insolvency practitioner therefore makesa correct and fair assessment of who is owed what, andin some cases HSBC will get back not just less than itlent but less than it would have got back had it donewhat RBS does.
RBS is a frequent flyer in this debate, so I shall have a
go at it, too. I am told that RBS will offset what it owesby way of redress and consequential loss against what itis owed by way of repayment of the loan. Therefore,although it is still owed money by the bankrupt business,it is owed less than it otherwise would have been, andwhen RBS seeks to limit its losses at the expense ofother creditors’ owed money, those creditors will losemoney as a result of RBS’s mis-selling. That is just plainwrong.
It is also wrong that some loans have been left outside
the redress scheme. Those who took on tailored businessloans, otherwise known as hidden or embedded swaps,have had exactly the same financial problem but for atechnical reason are outside the regulated arena. Underarticle 85 of the Financial Services and Markets Act2000 (Regulated Activities) Order 2001, due to somepretty technical reasoning, if a loan looks like a duck,swims like a duck and quacks, it is in fact a donkey.Some pretty smart lawyers have looked at that and theinescapable fact is that the legislation was written in away that allowed many businesses to be mis-sold swapsin an area that is unregulated.505 506
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Mark Garnier]
The FCA ’s frequently asked questions talk about
these so-called commercial loans, stating:
“Commercial loans generally fall outside the regulatory remit
of the FCA and we therefore cannot direct the banks to set up areview of these products”.
That might possibly be so, but is not the act of an FCA
member’s selling any product to an unsophisticatedcustomer a regulated activity that therefore falls underthe FCA ’s remit?
Mr Bellingham: I agree entirely with my hon. Friend.
Many of these businesses are not large concerns—someare SMEs and some are micro-businesses—and onecould not describe some of the proprietors as highlysophisticated business people. As far as they were concerned,they were mis-sold these fixed-rate tailored businessloans with the hidden swaps attached to them. Somehave been dealt with very quickly by the banks, butothers have not and the banks have just ignored themcompletely.
Mark Garnier: My hon. Friend makes incredibly
important point. The point of the regulator, the FCA,is to protect unsophisticated consumers, but it hasmanifestly let down the consumers who subscribed.
The paragraph in the FCA briefing note continues:
“The FCA has received legal advice supporting this view”—
about article 85. It goes on to say that the Treasury
Committee has carried out scrutiny of that advice. I ama member of the Treasury Committee and I think it isworth putting on the record just what that constitutes.
The Treasury Committee asked the regulator on many
occasions for sight of the legal advice on these embeddedswaps and on many occasions it said no. We askedwhether we could send our legal advisers around tohave a look at the advice on our behalf, but it continuedto say no. We had a public evidence session with thechief executive officer and chairman recently and questionedthem about the issue again. The answer they gave wasthat they were not prepared to let us see the advice as itwas confidential. We pressed them on whether we couldsend our legal team to have a look at it and theyanswered that they needed space from Parliament toconduct their activities.
The regulator is answerable to Parliament. Although
I am sympathetic to the submission that the regulatorcannot have every confidential document shown to allhon. Members, who may well then tell the press, theCEO and chairman simply cannot say that they need tobe excused one of their most fundamental duties—thatof answering to us here in this place. In the end, wepressured them to relent and our legal adviser looked atthe advice they had been given, and in fact they wereright. But this is a sorry story of the regulator notunderstanding its duties and its constitutional place asanswerable to Parliament.
In any sort of resolution scheme, it is inevitable that
some people will feel well treated and others hard doneby. One of my constituents was entitled to redress butfelt that he did not need it, because he had boughtexactly the product that he wanted and expected and hethinks it unfair on other people that he should seekredress when he took what he thinks was a fair deal. Buthe is unusual. I have constituents who have been completely
and totally rolled over by the banks. Consequential lossoffers are derisory for businesses that have taken alifetime to establish and just a few telephone calls bymis-incentivised relationship managers to destroy. Thereare no consequential loss payments for reputationsdestroyed, or for goodwill wasted and track recordssmashed.
I was a member of the Parliamentary Commission
on Banking Standards. We looked hard at how theregulator could drive better standards in the bankingindustry. There should be incentives for better behaviour,and banks are working on making their staff performto higher ethical standards, but for every carrot theremust be some sort of stick. If it is possible for banks tobe fined for fixing LIBOR and forex benchmarks andfor mis-selling insurance products, why have those bankswho have destroyed so many businesses been allowed tochoose their own form of redress with no further financialpenalty?
I am baffled why the regulator has set up a redress
scheme that is voluntary, has just one opportunity forappeal and is not being reviewed or assessed. Surely, it isright that people who are unsatisfied can have anindependent appeal assessed by the Financial OmbudsmanService. A special unit could easily be set up at the FOS,funded by the banks, to give one last chance of appealto those small businesses that fall outside the FOS’sremit but inside the redress scheme. I am also baffledwhy the regulator will not publish the terms of referenceand the agreements between the regulator and the bankson how the scheme is managed and run and what isexpected of it all. That lack of transparency can onlylead to mistrust in the system and the regulator. I amalso concerned that the regulator is so reluctant to sharewith agents of the Treasury Committee legal advice onwhether embedded swaps are regulated.
With so many people left destitute and impoverished
by what has happened, it is wrong that no one has beenbrought to account over this. Until such time as finesare levied and front-line staff guilty of mis-selling broughtto book, confidence in the banking sector and theregulator will struggle to improve and standards maylanguish at an unacceptable level.
The last sentence of the motion before us calls respectfully
for the Government to consider a review of this wholeprocess and the conduct of the regulator. I urge my hon.Friend the Economic Secretary to the Treasury to lookcarefully at whether to hold an independent review ofthis whole regrettable scheme.
3.17 pm
Roger Williams (Brecon and Radnorshire) (LD): My
speech will be relatively short because I have spoken onthe subject before. I commend the hon. Member forAberconwy (Guto Bebb) for the work that he has doneon this matter and for obtaining the debate. It is a greatsadness that so many businesses have still not been ableto come to an agreement with their banks to resolve theoutstanding matters. Yes, some businesses have reachedagreement, for which we commend them and the systemthat allowed that to happen, but many businesses arestill really suffering.
The damage is not only to individual businesses and
individuals—the people who own those businesses, whetherthey are sole traders or partners. Some of those have507 508
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schemesuffered very greatly. They have been impoverished; they
have suffered ill health because of the stress and worrycaused by the mis-selling of these products. Not only thoseindividuals and businesses, but their whole communitieshave suffered because people have lost their jobs orbusinesses have been prevented from expanding.
My constituent, Don Evans of Springdew, would
have been able to expand his business greatly if it hadnot been for the mis-selling of the swaps and the damagecaused to his reputation. He runs a business that packagestoiletries and pharmaceuticals, and he would have beenable to engage in a large contract with a national—indeed,international—pharmaceutical company to package itsmaterials if it had not been for the financial problemshe had as a result of the mis-selling of swaps.
The community in which Don Evans’s company
operates—the top end of the Swansea valley where,unfortunately, unemployment is still relatively high—hassuffered as a result of the bank’s behaviour. If that ismultiplied across the country, taking into account allthe communities and all the businesses that have suffered,it has an impact not only on the local economy, but onour national economy. It is a disgrace that some of thebanks that were bailed out by this country have causedthat problem.
Don Evans was negotiating a facility with his bank,
Barclays. He had banked with that bank for many years.The people there were not just bankers but trustedadvisers, as he saw them. He was running a relativelysmall business and did not have the financial sophisticationthat larger businesses would have, so he looked to thebank for advice. He wanted a facility to buy a partnerout of the business and he sat down to negotiate andcomplete that, when an aptly named Mr Shafto appearedon the scene and said that unless he entered into theinterest rate swap, the facility would not be made availableto him.
It is sad, in a way, that Mr Evans did not take up the
facility, but ended up with the swap and still had toservice the swap agreement. As I said, his business hassuffered greatly. The hon. Member for Nuneaton(Mr Jones), who is not in his place, said that the FCAagreement says that it should be possible to put peopleback in the same place as they were before they enteredthe swap, but unfortunately for Mr Evans, that is unlikelyever to happen. Such have been the financial problemsthat he suffered and, yes, the damage to his reputationthat he will not be able to get back to the place where hestarted.
Barclays is one of two banks that still link the redress
element to the consequential loss element. In Mr Evans’scase, redress has been offered but at an entirely inappropriatelevel of consequential loss—about 7%—which bears norelation to the damage that has been done to his company.It seems that he will have to go to litigation to receivesatisfaction from Barclays. He subsequently changedhis bank and is in a much better relationship now withanother bank, but that makes it even more difficult forhim to come to an agreement. He has been told thatthere is no point in his writing to or contacting Barclaysany more; he either accepts the redress offer and theentirely inappropriate consequential loss offer, or goesto litigation.
That is a tragedy for the firm. It is back on an even
keel now and is contributing to its community, but itcould have done so much more for that part of theSwansea valley, which is so desperately in need of
employment and manufacturing capacity. To me, thebehaviour of the bank was a disaster. I am sure manyright hon. and hon. Members have met senior people inthe bank who said that they would change their ways,do away with the target culture and be customer-focused.The best way for the banks to improve their reputationwould be to come to an agreement with their customers,such as Mr Evans.
3.24 pm
Ian Swales (Redcar) (LD): I rise to join the chorus of
thanks to the hon. Member for Aberconwy (GutoBebb); we all owe him a great debt for his relentlessspearheading of our efforts in this long saga. Only ahandful of constituents have come forward to tell methat they have been affected by this problem, but I havea very strong feeling that they are only the tip of theiceberg. I think that there are a lot of business peopleout there who are frightened of their banks and of whatmight happen to their business reputation if they comeforward, or who are so unsophisticated that they do noteven know that they have a problem. I think that thereare many affected businesses that we do not hear from.
Having said that, I have certainly seen the problem. I
welcome what has been done so far with the directredress scheme, but I still think that it has taken toolong. During this period we have seen business collapsesand even suicides, although not in my constituency.There are still huge issues remaining. Many Membershave spoken of the problems with the consequentialloss scheme, and I wish to add my voice to that.
I want to talk in greater detail about the banks’
behaviour and what they have done to my constituents.I will talk about one constituent, Mr Stephen Lilley,who operates a single retail shop in a seaside village.I am sure that he would not regard it as an insult if Idescribed him as unsophisticated as far as these productsare concerned. Indeed, such is their complexity that Iregard myself as unsophisticated, despite being a qualifiedaccountant.
Tessa Munt: It has always struck me that it would be
completely logical to require bank staff and independentfinancial advisers to be qualified to a certain level inorder to flog these things. Surely “unsophisticated”means anybody who does not have an equal qualificationwhen buying one of these things.
Ian Swales: My hon. Friend makes an interesting
point. I think that even small businesses, such as thosementioned by my hon. Friend the Member for Breconand Radnorshire (Roger Williams), probably shouldhave had independent financial advice to deal with theirown banks, which is a completely unacceptable situation.
I think that Mr Lilley’s case has wider implications,
although I could equally have used those of otherconstituents, such as Roy Myers, Martin Johnson andPeter Broom. Mr Lilley took out a loan for his business.He was asked to put up as security his house, his son’shouse, the commercial property, a share portfolio andthe goodwill of the business, which he did. It was a swapproduct with the additional liability of a credit line,which was not declared at the time. I think that weall know how complex these products are. It was aderivative product that was priced in US dollars and509 510
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Ian Swales]
then converted back to pounds. Mr Lilley had unknowingly
fully indemnified the bank for these facilities, includingthe credit line, which they were not aware of. They have,through a pro bono arrangement, had some very expertadvice on their situation. I should say that Mr Lilleymade it clear to his bank from the start that he wanteda simple, declining balance loan, but that was neveroffered to him. He was very keen to repay the loan andnot to take out a long-term arrangement, but that iswhat he did.
Mr Lilley has now been offered an alternative product—a
cap—by the independent reviewer. The expert whomMr Lilley is using believes that it is a regulated product,but the independent reviewer is not regulated to dealwith the product, so right from the start there is aquestion of legality about his being offered that alternativeproduct. At a meeting with HSBC on 24 October, theindependent reviewer admitted that he was paid byHSBC, which brings the independence into question.Until that date, Mr Lilley did not know that there wasan additional credit line in place, although it is someyears since the original arrangement. The failure todisclose that puts a real question mark over whether itwas contrary to section 1 of the Fraud Act 2006. It hasbeen impossible to ascertain when the credit line wasput in place or by whom. Moreover, the relationshipmanager was, in effect, selling a regulated mortgagebecause domestic properties were involved, and theywere not qualified or regulated to do so. There is awhole issue about the legality of what the banks weredoing. Mr Lilley and his family turned out to be guarantorsof the extra credit line, which was secured against theirhomes, and under an “all moneys” charge they wouldhave full liability. They have consistently asked forinformation about this, but the bank has still failed toprovide it.
On 21 August 2013, an adjudication was agreed, part
of the terms of which were that the swap was cancelled.Today, well over a year later, the swap is still in place.This is a small business person running a single shop—amom and pop business, as the Americans like to call it.He has had to lodge two homes, business premises anda share portfolio worth far more than the loan that hetook out. Because of the way that the bank has structuredthese products, it will not release any of the collateral.Mr Lilley would like to get some of his share portfolioback to help finance the problems he has as a result ofthe loan, but the bank will not release it. That is becauseit is itself using the assets that have been lodged forwider purposes. There is an underlying scandal goingon.
Mr Lilley’s loan agreement says:
“In the event of HSBC’s insolvency or default or that of any
brokers involved with your transaction positions may be liquidatedor closed without your consent. In certain circumstances you maynot get back the actual assets which you lodged as collateral andyou may have to accept any available payments in cash.”
That means: “Y our home may be at risk if the bank
does not keep up the repayments. Even if the loan is upto date, if the bank or any brokers become insolvent,the bank may call in your assets.” That is a very onerouscondition. The bank can do this because in 2007 theFCA changed the client asset rules, which contain twoimportant clauses. CASS 3.1.5 says:“the firm is given a right to use the asset, and the firm treats the
asset as if legal title and associated rights to that asset had beentransferred to the firm subject only to an obligation to returnequivalent assets to the client upon satisfaction of the client’sobligation to the firm.”
In CASS 3.1.7, the position becomes even clearer:
“the asset ceases to belong to the client and in effect becomes thefirm’s asset and is no longer in need of the full range of clientasset protection. The firm may exercise its right to treat the assetsas its own by, for example, clearly so identifying the asset in itsown books and records.”
That starts to explain why the banks are so reluctant
to offer shorter-term products, or different products, aspart of the redress scheme: it is because they are usingthese assets in their own balance sheets. Between 2007and 2008, when the regulations changed, RBS added£700 billion of assets to its balance sheet—equivalent toabout half the UK economy. I suspect that an awful lotof houses and businesses are on RBS’s balance sheetand people do not even realise it. As a major shareholderof RBS, the Treasury needs to examine this, particularlyas the Bank of England is saying that it is more likely tolet banks fail in future. Many people could find themselveslosing businesses and assets they did not even knowwere part of a bank’s balance sheet.
The operation of the compensation scheme, the
behaviour of the banks, and, importantly, as the hon.Member for Wyre Forest (Mark Garnier) said, thebehaviour of the FCA and question marks over itsindependence, mean that the scandal is continuing. Itreally is time for the Government to conduct a trulyindependent inquiry.
3.34 pm
Bill Wiggin (North Herefordshire) (Con): I shall not
trouble the House for too long, but I must draw itsattention to my entry in the Register of Members’Financial Interests.
My constituents William and Frances May have brought
the actions of UK Acorn Finance to my attention. Iunderstand that the problems with UK Acorn Financehave been raised many times in the House over the pastseven years and that at least 40 Members have Acornvictims among their constituents. My constituents tellme that the Financial Conduct Authority claims that ithas an insufficient mandate to investigate, while theFinancial Ombudsman Service compensation ceiling isinadequate for many commercial businesses impactedby UK Acorn Finance. My constituents would like toknow what action the Government are taking to regulateand investigate effectively the actions of the companyand whether it should even be allowed to continuetrading.
The Connaught Income Fund will also be familiar
to many colleagues. It was incredibly disappointing tolearn last month that investors and all parties had failedto reach a negotiated settlement to address investorlosses in the Connaught Series 1 fund by the FCA, thedeadline being 31 October. Will the Government maintainthe pressure on the FCA to ensure that it continues towork actively to sort out this mess?
Another of my constituents runs a company called
Pixley Berries and claims that he is currently
“receiving the same treatment from HSBC as widely published
with reference to RBS.”511 512 4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeMy constituent has refused to go along with it and is in
the process of transferring to another bank. Meanwhile,he has consequential losses of some £500,000, so heestimates that the interest rate hedging product he wasmis-sold set back his business by £500,000. He hasreceived £200,000 in redress, but in terms of well consideredand evidenced consequential losses he has been offered£5,000 against a claim of £190,000. The reality for abusiness such as his is that there has been no change inconduct. Does the Minister agree not only that theFCA redress scheme needs to be improved, but that thebanks need to change their behaviour fundamentally?
Paul Farrelly: Given that the hon. Gentleman has
mentioned RBS, which is owned by the taxpayer, may Iadd to my previous remarks? DK Motorcycles was notonly bounced into the global restructuring group atRBS, but bounced back and forth between Birminghamand Manchester several times. Is it not a duty of theGovernment to make sure not only that the stables areproperly cleaned, but that the shark cage is emptied sothat the activities of people in the bank are brought tobook and we can have more confidence in RBS in thefuture?
Bill Wiggin: What is not to love about an intervention
about motorcycles? I thank the hon. Gentleman forthat. Obviously, the Minister is going to speak, so I willnot take too much time. It is right that she should havethe opportunity to explain the Government’s position,but the hon. Gentleman’s point about confidence isabsolutely right.
The campaign group Bully-Banks has a number of
suggestions—many colleagues have mentioned them—onhow to improve the FCA redress scheme. One suggestiontargets the fact that many small and medium-sizedenterprises were excluded from the scheme because theywere deemed to be “financially sophisticated”and thereforeable to understand the interest rate hedging productsold to them.
The Government need to create an independent appeal
tribunal to determine whether a company was in fact“financially sophisticated”and therefore able to understandwhat it was buying. One company that would benefit isallpay, which is in my constituency and with which Ihave worked. It was excluded from the redress schemebecause it had more than 50 employees at the relevanttime. That cannot be a qualification for understandinga complex financial instrument, so I urge the Governmentto consider the issue carefully. Apparently allpay fallsoutside the FCA ’s unique version of what constitutes anSME, and that cannot be right. That company lost£2.25 million and it has spent the past five years payingit off.
I appreciate that an extension of the FCA redress
scheme might open the floodgates to a wave of newclaims against other banks and trigger a significantincrease in their provisions for mis-selling liabilities.However, I want the Government to support all affectedbusinesses, of whatever size, in this matter. As I have said,the campaign group Bully-Banks wants an independenttribunal to determine “financial sophistication”. It wantsthe redress scheme to be extended so that appeal tribunaldecisions are based on what actually happened, not onthe size of the company.I will not detain the House a great deal longer. The
FCA has a difficult job, but an important one, and Ibelieve I am registered with the FCA in one of my roles.My plea is for it to focus its efforts on the people whohave done the wrong thing, rather than increase theburden of regulation on people who are doing the rightthing.
3.39 pm
Cathy Jamieson (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (Lab/Co-
op): Thank you, Madam Deputy Presiding Officer.Sorry, Madam Deputy Speaker. I always do that; I havebeen thinking too much about Scotland during the day.
I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate.
Hon. Members have given several examples about problemsfaced by their constituents. As a constituency MP, Ihave heard from a number of my constituents or smallbusinesses that have suffered similar consequences.
The motion addresses the perceived failure of the
FCA redress scheme. I was of course aware that thescheme had attracted criticism. We have heard quite alot about that today, particularly in relation to some ofthe problems involved in the cases that hon. Membershave raised. I will speak about them in more detail.
Before I consider the merits of the redress scheme, it
is worth remembering how we got into the situation ofneeding such a scheme in the first place. We musttherefore again address the mis-selling of interest ratehedging products that made the scheme necessary, ashon. Members have done during the debate.
Hon. Members are probably aware—the banks certainly
are—that I have spoken often and at considerable lengthabout the need for banks to eradicate the culture ofmis-selling and to put their own house in order. Thebanks have a duty, whether we call it a fiduciary, anethical or a human decency duty, to act in the bestinterests of their customers. Absolutely fundamental tothat is the requirement to ensure not only that customersare sold products that they want and need, but that theyunderstand the terms, conditions and caveats that underpinthem.
From time to time, things can and do go wrong, and
not even the most prescient among us can anticipateall the nuances and fluctuations in the money marketsthat may affect the products we purchase. However,just like the rewards associated with any product, therisks must be clearly stated from the outset. It can beargued that interest rate hedging products in and ofthemselves might not always be bad when sold inappropriate circumstances—they may help to shieldbank customers and even small businesses from the riskof sharp interest rates movements—but, as we haveheard this afternoon, it is clear that in many cases therisks have not been fully explained to, or fully understoodby, the customers.
The FCA has clearly laid out the shortcomings in the
information that it has provided. Nearly 19,000 smallbusiness customers of major UK banks took part in thereview, and among the main problems they highlightedwere the poor disclosure of exit costs, the failure toascertain customers’ understanding of risk, the strayingof non-advised sales into advised ones—that has beenraised this afternoon—and the fact that the sale ofproducts was driven by rewards and incentives. I willbriefly take each in turn.513 514
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Cathy Jamieson]
In its briefing, the House of Commons Library gives
the example of a customer who was sold an interest ratehedging product that lasted longer than the loan whoserisk it hedged. When the bank chose not to renew theloan, the customer was left with a stark choice betweenpaying the extortionate breakage fees and continuing topay the monthly cost of the hedging product. The latteroption has been likened to a customer continuing to payfor the insurance on a car that they have sold. It isimportant to note that, unlike for a fixed-rate loan, aninterest rate swap agreement is separate from the loancontract and must be terminated independently. Fromsome of the speeches in this debate, it is clear that thathas not always been entirely understood by those involved.Repaying the underlying borrowing does not automaticallyterminate the interest rate structures, and as we haveheard, customers are not always made sufficiently awareof that.
Most of us who do not work in finance, banking or
associated professions will perhaps have a rather sketchyunderstanding of the risk. There is nothing wrong withhedging against risk; it is a widely used practice that hasoccurred in many different manifestations for manyyears. However, the concept of hedging against risk hasspawned a diverse range of products that are sometimesdizzying in their complexity, even for those who perhapsrun their own businesses and think of themselves as ifnot “sophisticated” in the way defined, none the less ashaving a reasonably good handle on things, yet theyfind themselves caught out.
Derivatives are the most common example of that.
Interest rate hedging products are not as complex assome derivatives, but they are complex enough to confoundthe unwary, especially where they involve structuredcollars that can effectively result in customers payingmore if interest rates fall beneath an agreed level. Thatrequires a finely balanced judgment by any customer,and an understanding of the vagaries of interest rates.It is crucial that the bank selling interest rate hedgingproducts explains and defines the product to the customerand ensures that it matches their circumstances, but aswe have heard, many banks did not do that.
Bob Stewart: Surely it is the bank’s duty when it starts
to fiddle around with interest rates to warn the customerthat that is happening and not just suddenly do it.
Cathy Jamieson: The hon. Gentleman makes a good
point, and some of the concerns and examples havebeen about banks that seemed to be selling products,but not outlining the potential for interest rates to dropor giving customers information about the bank’s ownforecasts. We have real difficulties with such circumstances.
Paul Farrelly: One issue that arose in many cases is
that firms were not given a choice—the issue ofconditionality, when a loan was advanced only if thecustomer took out a hedging product that was acceptableto the bank. I would want confidence that an easy test isbeing applied in the review process: if the bank was notthe provider of the product, would it have accepted thecompany entering into an open-ended obligation? If theanswer is no and the bank would otherwise have refusedthe loan, the sale was clearly inappropriate.Cathy Jamieson: My hon. Friend makes a good point
and I was going to say something about the circumstancesthat he and my hon. Friend the Member for Dumfriesand Galloway (Mr Brown) mentioned and that elementof compulsion. Clearly, many people felt that they hadno option but to take those products or else they wouldnot get the loan. As I am sure everyone understands,there are circumstances in which people rely on banks,and they trusted them and believed they were gettinggood advice.
Ian Swales: To emphasise that point, a constituent of
mine was presented with an agreement to sign at thepoint when they thought they were signing a straightforwardloan agreement. They literally did not have time tothink, let alone make a choice.
Cathy Jamieson: Indeed, the hon. Gentleman makes
a useful point and similar circumstances have been broughtto my attention of people who thought at the point ofsignature that all they were signing was a refinancingagreement, and they had not understood the fullconsequences. We must drill down on those issues toensure that people get the justice they deserve.
In some instances, product sellers painted only a
partial picture of the product and the nature of theprotection offered—I see the Minister is listening intentlyand I am sure she will agree. That resulted in customerspurchasing products that were not appropriate to theircircumstances, with the result that they lost money orspent money unnecessarily.
In the review, the FCA draws a distinction between
sophisticated and unsophisticated customers. Under theterms of the agreement with the banks, only the cases ofcustomers deemed to be unsophisticated were subject tothe review. The FCA defines unsophisticated customersas those less likely to have had the expertise or resourcesto seek advice before purchasing an interest rate hedgingproduct. People might suggest that that is a common-sensedistinction, and one that correctly focuses on customerswho were less likely fully to comprehend the nature andconsequences of the product they were being sold, butthe question of how the distinction was arrived at is anentirely different one. It will be interesting to hear theMinister’s view on that, and on the question of whetherpeople ought to have the opportunity to appeal if theywere put into the sophisticated category.
Paul Farrelly: I was going to ask the Minister about
the tests but, as my hon. Friend has mentioned it, I willask her. The tests applied in the review reflect thedefinitions in the legislation that allows small companiesto file less information than large companies. The testof sophistication is size, and yet small-ish or relativelysmall firms were deemed as sophisticated. Does sheagree that that needs to be reviewed?
Cathy Jamieson: My hon. Friend once again puts
forth his points coherently. I am sure the Minister isconsidering her response. We must always look forunintended consequences. Did the review pull in allpossible situations? Perhaps it could pull in more if theMinister is of a mind to look at things slightly differently.
Non-advised sales perhaps strayed into advice. The
FCA describes non-advice sales as ones in which
“no personal recommendation is made and you leave the customer
to decide how they wish to proceed.”515 516 4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeThere is an analogy with other generic advice. If someone
recommends that a person should buy household contentsinsurance without mentioning a specific insurer or policy,and if the recommendation is unconnected with the saleof a contract, that would not fall within the definitionof advice. The FCA is clear that sales staff should avoidmaking personal recommendations, and therefore givingadvice. It states that sales staff
“should confirm that the decision is the customer’s and that the”
salesperson “cannot give them advice.” The problem inmany of the situations we have heard about todayappears to be that sellers actively recommended andeven promoted IRHPs to customers. My hon. Friendthe Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Paul Farrelly)outlined that in some detail, as did my hon. Friend theMember for Dumfries and Galloway. There weredevastating consequences for businesses and lives in thosesituations.
I have criticised the sales-driven culture—the culture
of targets, rewards and incentives—in the past. Thebanking sector will say that it is trying to address thatculture and to move to a different approach, but thereality is that the culture was imported into retail bankingfrom the more speculative areas of investment banking,where the risks were greater and the rewards higher. Itsimply was not appropriate for many of those smallbusinesses and customers. Some of the overt incentivesto sell such products, whether or not they were in thecustomer’s interest, have been removed, but I continueto worry. I want the Minister’s assurance that we are ontop of the situation, and that there is no indirect pressureon staff to sell those products. We need to continue thatculture change in our banks. That has to come from thetop and go right through to the bottom.
On the perceived problems with the FCA scheme, the
scheme was supposed to ensure that small businesscustomers who were mis-sold products received an offerof fair and reasonable redress as soon as possible. TheFCA tells us that more than 99% of redress offers havebeen communicated to almost 17,000 small businesses.More than £1.5 billion has been paid out in redress sofar, including £300 million in compensation for lostopportunities. However, I think it would be fair to say,given the debate this afternoon, that it is evident thatpeople still have concerns about the scheme’s shortcomings.I hope the FCA will take that into consideration, withsupport from the Minister. Customers who purchasedcaps that place a limit on interest rate rises are notincluded in the scope of the review, unless they havecomplained to the bank during the course of theindependent review and are non-sophisticated customers.Other types of hedged loans were not included in thereview process either.
My hon. Friend the Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme
mentioned the case of Crestsign v.NatWest, illustrating
the difficulty that some small businesses have experiencedin getting redress from banks. The judgment in the caseconcluded that the bankers
“did not show themselves worthy of the trust that was placed…but
unfortunately for Crestsign, the common law provides…no remedybecause the banks successfully disclaimed responsibility for theadvice they gave on the suitability of the swap, which was negligentbut not actionable.”
In this case the bank managed to successfully argue
that, since it did not owe its customer any duty of care,it had no obligation to pay compensation. We can seewhy people are concerned. The bank was able to argue
its case after the event and was not held to account onwhether it should have sold the product in the firstplace. Worryingly, the independent reviewer KPMG—independent reviewers are a crucial part of the FCAredress process—seemed to agree with the verdict. Doesthe Minister think that appeals need to be looked at?
I argued at the start of my speech that what we really
need is cultural change.
Steve Rotheram: Will my hon. Friend give way?
Cathy Jamieson: I apologise, but I am at the limit of
my time.
Will the Minister please address the lack of an appeal
process? Will she address tax treatment by HMRC andlook at having a review of compensation levels? I lookforward to hearing what she has to say.
3.57 pm
The Economic Secretary to the Treasury (Andrea Leadsom):
I join the long queue of Members congratulating myhon. Friend the Member for Aberconwy (Guto Bebb).His leadership has been a sign of Parliament at its best.We are trying to deal with a very real problem and like aterrier he has stuck to it, for a few years now, to shedlight on an issue that has shown the banks at their veryworst. I am delighted that so many Members haveattended the debate. I congratulate them on showinggreat generosity of spirit in being here and putting thecase for their constituents.
I would like to start by pointing out, as other hon.
Members have, that progress has been made. This is thefirst time there has been a voluntary redress scheme onthis scale. All of us were disappointed at its slow start,but we are very pleased that the review has progressedwell. I can tell the House that 17,000 SMEs took partin the review. Some 91% of sales were deemed to benon-compliant, which is a totally shocking statistic.Some 14,000 cash offers have been made and more than£1.5 billion has now been paid out to the more than10,000 SMEs that accepted the offer. That progress issignificant, but Members are right to point out thatthere is a cohort of people who have not yet received theattention or the fairness to which they are absolutelyentitled. I am not here to be an apologist for either thebanks or the FCA, which is running the redress scheme.I can assure all Members that if they write to me aboutindividual cases I will be happy to investigate further ontheir behalf.
Dr Phillip Lee (Bracknell) (Con): I spoke a short time
ago to Jonathan and Katie Friedman, constituents wholive in Finchampstead. A building society, not a bank,sold them a hidden swap product not covered by thisredress scheme. Building societies trade on the basis ofbeing ethical? Does the Minister agree that this is hardlyethical behaviour by a building society?
Andrea Leadsom: I cannot comment on individual
cases in the Chamber, but if there has been wrongdoing,the Government absolutely do not condone it, and theredress scheme is designed to provide compensationand fairness. We are determined that it will do that.517 518
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemePaul Farrelly: Progress is undoubtedly being made,
but that does not mean that lessons should not belearned. The hon. Member for Shrewsbury and Atcham(Daniel Kawczynski) rightly asked the Minister whethershe would look at each of the cases named in the House.I urge her to do so. In addition, she should review thescheme and the way in which it was set up, leaving smallbusinesses such as DK Motorcycles with no right ofappeal. Will she commit to giving such businesses somehope of effective redress in the future?
Andrea Leadsom: I will certainly write to the FCA
about all the cases raised in the Chamber today—andI will expect a reply.
Mr Bellingham: The key point is that some of the
commercial loans—fixed-rate tailored business loanswith hidden swaps—are not taken seriously by somebanks. Indeed, some people in the FCA saying thatthose loans are not regulated, so it would be veryhelpful if she looked at that point with the FCA.
Andrea Leadsom: Tailored business swaps were provided
by largely Y orkshire and Clydesdale bank, which hasvoluntarily agreed to look at redress in a similar way tothe way in which the interest rate swap redress schemeworks.
I want to move on because there is another debate to
follow. Let me address some of the questions raised bymy hon. Friend the Member for Aberconwy. He askedwhy some banks are not splitting the original loss andthe consequential losses, and he pointed out that theamount of redress paid is inconsistent between banks.He mentioned the fact that a particular whistleblowersays that banks have pressurised independent reviewersto serve the banks’ interests rather than those of theSME, and argued that the FCA is not showing thebank-by-bank redress numbers. He asked whether weshould set up an appeals process for reviewers to look ateach other’s banks’ reviews, and spoke about the lack ofpayment of consequential losses beyond the 8% that isnormally provided. He addressed the issue of HMRC’stax treatment of redress and of whether embeddedswaps should be included. I want to run through thoseissues very quickly.
I can assure my hon. Friend and all Members that the
FCA has been determined throughout the process toget to the bottom of this. Occasionally, Members mightthink that the FCA is not interested or not keen toresolve the matter, but that could not be further fromthe case. In particular, the FCA carefully considers anyvariance in redress offers to make sure that standardsare applied consistently. It selects individual cases forreview based on feedback from customers, campaigngroups and MPs to ensure these have been dealt withfairly. Independent reviewers report regularly to theFCA, both on the judgments they are making and onhow the banks are performing, and independent reviewersregularly meet each other to ensure a consistent approachto assessing claims.
My hon. Friend referred to the agreement between
the FCA and the participating banks. As I understandit, this agreement sets out the principles of how thereview should have been undertaken. I understand,too, that the FCA is prohibited from releasing theseagreements by confidentiality restrictions. I can assureMembers, however, that I will write to the FCA and ask
for clarification, bearing in mind Members’ desire tohave that made public if possible.
Ian Swales: The Minister has talked about the
independence of reviewers. Even the FCA ’s notes statethat it has had to require banks to change independentreviewers when there has been a potential conflict ofinterest. It is clear that reviewers are not always asindependent as they should be. What is the Ministerdoing about that?
Andrea Leadsom: The FCA has considered whether
reviewers are independent, and the instance cited by thehon. Gentleman probably demonstrates that it is activelytaking part in that process. As I have said, however, ifMembers want to raise particular cases with me, I willlook into them.
My hon. Friend the Member for Aberconwy referred
to the allegation by a former independent reviewer fromKPMG that the banks had applied undue pressure for achange in a redress determination. That is a very seriousclaim, and I know that the FCA has taken it veryseriously. The regulator has given a reassurance that ithas maintained close oversight of the relationship betweenbanks and their independent reviewers throughout thereview, and that it does not believe that that allegation issupported by the facts.
A number of Members raised the issue of embedded
swaps. It is important to define that term. I understandit to refer to fixed-rate loans with an economic, ormark-to-market, break cost. As is standard practicewith fixed-rate loans, a break cost is incurred by aborrower who pays off a loan early. The tradition in theUnited Kingdom has been that the terms and conditionsof contracts between businesses, such as loans, are notgenerally prescribed by the Government, and we normallyexpect businesses to take positive action. First, they cancomplain to their banks if they are unhappy with theirfixed-rate loans, and many customers have already takenthat route. The FCA monitors banks’ complaint-handlingprocesses, and takes action if it sees a problem. Secondly,smaller businesses can have recourse to the FinancialOmbudsman Service.
What is vitally important—and the Treasury has
ensured that this will happen in future—is that when abusiness enters into a fixed-term loan, the terms of thecontract and, in particular, the way in which break costsare calculated are absolutely clear. We have secureda voluntary agreement, through the British BankersAssociation, that banks will provide the same level ofdisclosure of features within fixed-rate loans— such asbreak costs—as applies to interest rate hedging products.Most important, the banks will ensure that break costsare fully explained, and that worked examples are provided.
A number of Members also voiced concerns about
the number of businesses that have been assessed assophisticated and therefore fall outside the scheme. TheGovernment have made it clear that when a businesslacks the necessary skills and knowledge fully to understandthe risks posed by these products, it should receiveappropriate redress. So far, about a third of businesseshave been deemed to be sophisticated and to fall outsidethe scheme. There has been criticism of that: many havesuggested that all businesses should be covered. TheGovernment believe that there needs to be a defined cut519 520
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Schemeoff-point at which more sophisticated businesses take
responsibility for understanding the products they arepurchasing. Failure to introduce that cut-off point wouldweaken the incentives for businesses to act sensiblywhen purchasing financial instruments, and could openthe floodgates to any businesses that had lost out as aresult of a financial transaction.
However, the FCA has amended the way in which the
sophistication test criterion can be applied, and informationabout that is available. Time does not permit me to giveevery detail of where we started and where we are now,but the aim has been to ensure that all businesses thatare unsophisticated can fall within the scheme. Theremay well have been some incorrect reassessments, butthere have been very few subsequent complaints.
Bill Wiggin: Will my hon. Friend give way?
Paul Farrelly: Will the Minister give way?
Andrea Leadsom: I will give way once more, but not, I
am afraid to the hon. Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme(Paul Farrelly), because time is short.
Bill Wiggin: It is very generous of my hon. Friend to
give way, and I am delighted by what she has said. Canshe also reassure the House that the number of employeeswill not be a criterion for sophistication?
Andrea Leadsom: I can certainly tell my hon. Friend
that the number of employees is a factor, but it is notnecessarily the only factor, so the fact that a businesshas more than 50 employees may not necessarily makethem a sophisticated investor.
Paul Farrelly rose—
Andrea Leadsom: I am sorry, but I will not give way.
Many Members have mentioned the financial
ombudsman scheme’s money award limit that it is ableto offer to customers. This level was deemed to be mostappropriate. It does ensure that most complaints madeby consumers and micro-enterprises can be addressed,but reflects the fact that cases involving very large sumsof money may be more appropriately dealt with by thecourts, rather than an informal process that has limitedprospects of appeal.
In the event that the financial ombudsman scheme
considers that fair compensation requires payment ofa larger amount, it can make a recommendation that afirm pay the balance. That decision on the higher amountis not binding on the firm, but there is evidence thatsuggests that firms that subsequently go to the courtswill find the courts take into account the recommendationof the FOS in determining what the outcome should be.
Mr Marcus Jones: Does my hon. Friend not accept,
however, that many of these businesses are extremelysmall and are not in a position to go to law to see theombudsman’s recommendation backed up, and thattherefore the ombudsman’s remit in terms of the damagesit can impose needs to be wider?
Andrea Leadsom: I agree with my hon. Friend in
principle, but, as I have just set out, the intention hasbeen that the sophistication test captures those who arenot sophisticated as well as those businesses that are
small and do not have the means to go to the courts. Inaddition, if they have been to the FOS, the intention isthat that would cover the vast majority of cases. As Ihave said, I urge Members to write to me with anyspecific cases that they want me to look at.
Paul Farrelly: Will the hon. Lady give way?
Andrea Leadsom: No, I am sorry. The hon. Gentleman
has had many opportunities.
It is important to note that the aim of redress is to
put the customer back in the position they would havebeen in if a mis-sale had not taken place. The FCA hasbeen clear that the appropriate redress for each customerwill be determined on the basis of what is fair andreasonable. This could include, for example, the replacementof an existing product. That might be appropriate in thecase of a business that was highly leveraged. In theseinstances, it seems reasonable that redress can consist ofproviding the small business with the alternative productthey would have purchased, and refunding the differencein costs incurred by the business as a result.
Members have raised the question of whether there
should be a separate appeals process. I would, however,reiterate that the role of the independent reviewer is tobe that appeal—to ensure that the process is fair andbusinesses have adequate opportunity to put their case.Furthermore, eligible businesses have recourse to a furtherappeal to the FOS if they are not happy with theoutcome of their review.
Many Members also raised the issue of Barclays and
its decision not to delink the original loss and consequentiallosses. I think at the moment that that decision is onefor Barclays to have made, but after hearing the strengthof feeling in the Chamber today I will write to Barclaysto ask it to explain precisely why it feels this is fair tocustomers and to ask it to consider whether it would bewilling to conduct its review in a different way. I understandthat Barclays has agreed to split the payment for thosecustomers in financial distress, but I will follow that upwith the bank.
I shall now return to the specific points Members
have made. The hon. Member for Newcastle-under-Lymeraised the case of DK Motorcycles, which failed thesophistication test. He made a very good case in supportinghis constituents, and I will take it up on his behalf. Hedid not say whether the company’s situation was nowresolved and he named RBS as the culprit. For manysmall businesses the new competition being promotedby this Government—the arrival of new banks, particularlyin the SME market—will be vital.
My hon. Friend the Member for Redditch (Karen
Lumley) named HSBC as the bank in the case of herconstituents the Parsons, who had an ethical business.There were significant consequential losses and she feltthat the offer made by the bank was not significant. Thehon. Member for Dumfries and Galloway (Mr Brown)mentioned Barclays as the bank to the leisure parkbusiness in his constituency. He cited fear of talking tothe bank as one reason why some small and medium-sizedenterprises will not use this redress scheme—they areafraid of the consequences of taking on their bank.
My hon. Friend the Member for Hexham (Guy
Opperman) gave an informative intervention, particularlyabout the risk of having to go to court and the fear of521 522
4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress Scheme[Andrea Leadsom]
taking on a bank, given the inequality in the resources
between a small business and a bank. I take that verymuch to heart. My hon. and learned Friend the Memberfor Harborough (Sir Edward Garnier) named RBS asthe bank for his constituents Mr and Mrs Hamblin andtheir property company. He asked me particularly tolean on the FCA to ensure that it is doing a thoroughenough job in enforcing the redress scheme, and I amhappy to do that.
The hon. Member for Rochester and Strood (Mark
Reckless) asked why information on redress is not sharedin detail and why consequential loss claims have almostall been turned down. Information on bank-by-bankredress is available but in aggregate form. One reasonthat has been put to me for that is a sense that if a bankjust pays out, there is an implication that they may havebeen guilty as charged, whereas in fact the ability tooffer an alternative product will depend on the bank’sproduct range and its ability to offer a suitable alternativeproduct. I will look into this further, but that is potentiallypartially an answer. On consequential losses, 8% ofconsequential losses is deemed to be sufficient in mostcases, but, again, if Members want to write to me, I willlook into individual points.
My hon. Friend the Member for Nuneaton (Mr Jones)
talked about how linking simple to consequential lossesis very unfair. He feels that the Financial OmbudsmanService is not able to enforce enough compensation. Heshould be aware that FOS is consulting in the new yearon that point. He also mentioned the issue of the taxtreatment of redress, and I will raise that with HerMajesty’s Revenue and Customs, as a fair point hasbeen made by many hon. Members.
The hon. Member for Ceredigion (Mr Williams) raised
the issue of tailored business loans, which I have alreadyaddressed.
My hon. Friend the Member for Beckenham (Bob
Stewart) raised the case of Mr D’Eye, who was put intothe RBS GRG and then administrators were sent in.The FCA is looking at the accusations that have beenmade about the way RBS has treated small businessesand will report on that in due course.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wyre Forest (Mark
Garnier), an ex-colleague of mine on the TreasuryCommittee, made important points about the cohort ofclaimants who do not feel they have received justice. Hediscussed how this is the first major scandal the FCAhas had to deal with and said that it should see that it isvital it handles it properly. I can absolutely assure allMembers that I will do my best to ensure that that is thecase.The hon. Member for Brecon and Radnorshire (Roger
Williams) raised the case of Springdew and how amis-sale cost the whole community, naming Barclays inthat case. The hon. Member for Redcar (Ian Swales)named HSBC and made the point that his constituentStephen Lilley was sold an extraordinarily complexproduct. Finally, my hon. Friend the Member for NorthHerefordshire (Bill Wiggin) raised another case involvingUK Acorn Finance, which the FCA is currently closelylooking at.
I wish to conclude by saying that SMEs are the
lifeblood of our economy, and it is vital that thisGovernment do everything we can to support them.Therefore, I urge Members not only to tell me aboutspecific cases, but to have confidence in the fact thatthe FCA and the Treasury are determined to get to thebottom of this.
4.19 pm
Guto Bebb: This has been a worth-while and wide-ranging
debate, and it is clear that specific and, in some cases,serious concerns have been raised. Although I welcomethe Minister’s comments, especially on the tax issue,and her willingness to deal with the FCA on specificcases, I also believe that many people’s confidence in theindependent reviewers has been tarnished by this week’srevelations in relation to the whistleblower. I must stressthat the denial of the claims by KPMG that there wasno contact whatever between the independent reviewersand members of staff at RBS can be contradictedsimply by looking at the LinkedIn profiles of peoplewho work at KPMG on project Rosetta. We could alsolook at what the members of staff at RBS claim, as theysay that part of their responsibility is to talk to eachother. I think that the denials that have been made thusfar are unsatisfactory. As there is another debate tofollow, I will conclude by saying that the motion shouldbe supported as it stands, and that I commend it to theHouse.
Question put and agreed to.Resolved,
That this House has considered the Financial Conduct Authority’s
redress scheme, adopted as a result of the mis-selling of complexinterest rate derivatives to small and medium sized businesses,and has found the scheme’s implementation to be lacking inconsistency and basic fairness; considers such failures to beunacceptable; is concerned about lack of transparency of arrangementsbetween the regulator and the banks; is concerned about thelonger than expected time scale for implementation; calls for aprompt resolution of these matters; and asks for the Governmentto consider appointing an independent inquiry to explore both
these failings and to expedite compensation for victims.523 524 4 DECEMBER 2014 Financial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeFinancial Conduct Authority
Redress SchemeBranded Medicines (NHS)
4.20 pm
Mr Andrew Lansley (South Cambridgeshire) (Con): I
beg to move,
That this House has considered availability and pricing of
branded medicines on the NHS.
I am most grateful to the Backbench Business Committee
for providing this opportunity to raise an issue ofcontinuing importance to Members and their constituents.The debate will be short, but I am sure that we will beable to put it on the record that there are areas ofconcern. The two Front-Bench teams will, I am sure, bekeen not only to respond now but to take some of thesematters forward in the future as the Minister and hiscolleagues have sought to do over the past couple ofyears.
Colleagues from the previous debate must not feel
that they have trespassed too much on to our debate.Listening to the contributions, it was amply clear that itwas important for Members to be able to represent theirconstituencies. I know that all colleagues are very happythat they had the chance to do that.
Let me set the scene. Over the many years that I have
been engaged with health matters, one of the mostpersistent sources of frustration has occurred when ourconstituents have not been able to access the medicinesthat they need through the national health service. Thatcan happen because of a lack of data, and the NationalInstitute for Health and Care Excellence will not appraisesuch a drug at that point because it determines that it isnot cost-effective and is not therefore approved forNHS use, or because local commissioning decisions areincorporated in a local formulary.
Since its inception, NICE has created a more consistent
national basis for decisions on access to medicines, butthe application of what is essentially an arbitrary cost-effectiveness threshold still means that patients can bedenied access to some new drugs. That has been exacerbatedby the chronic slowness of uptake of some new medicinesacross the NHS, because of a clinical conservatism—newdrug treatments are viewed as an extra cost rather thanan opportunity to improve outcomes—or a generalbureaucratic lack of responsiveness to patients.
That is deeply ironic as the UK is among the leading
countries for drug discovery. We may represent only 3%of the international pharmaceuticals market, but wehave been responsible in this country for 10% of newdrug development, including such major innovations asmonoclonal antibodies, which were first invented in myown constituency at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology.
As a coalition Government, we commit resources to
world-leading research. Ministers have rightly soughtboth early access to new medicines and continuingsupport for research and innovation, but we continue toface institutional and cultural resistance. One of myobjectives over recent years was to tackle that issue. Iwanted to assure patients that, through the NHS, theycould access the best and latest medicines and treatments.We wanted the NHS to adopt new innovation andtechnologies and to move away from a system in whichthe drug companies set a price that NICE and the NHSappraise and reject, leaving patients unable to access themedicines that their clinicians believe are best for them.Instead, we should have a system that puts the patient
at the heart of the service. If a clinician believes that amedicine is the right one for their patient, they shouldbe able to prescribe it and the NHS and the pharmaceuticalcompany should settle on a fair price, reflecting thevalue of that drug and a fair return to the costs involvedin drug development.
Bill Wiggin (North Herefordshire) (Con): One of the
things my right hon. Friend will know probably betterthan anyone from his role as Secretary of State forHealth and something that is not well understood bymy constituents is that the NHS is one of the mostexciting clients for anybody selling drugs and has themost efficient buy-in capability. Why does that not seemto come across to our patients and constituents, andwhat about medicines that used to work but now are notavailable? Will he cover that in his speech?
Mr Lansley: On the latter point, no, but drugs that
move beyond patent become generically available to theNHS. On the former point, my hon. Friend is absolutelyright. I often found this issue frustrating. The best wayfor drug companies to get their new medicines adoptedinternationally is to introduce them successfully intothe NHS. As we move to a more systematic patientrecord system, the introduction of new treatments andmedicines through the NHS will provide the strongestpossible database of outcomes anywhere in the world,because of the character and scale of the NHS. So hemakes a really important point.
The principle behind securing patient access to new
medicines lay behind the proposal for a value-basedstructure of drug pricing. It was my intention that comethe introduction of the new pharmaceutical price regulationscheme, which was to be negotiated for January 2014, atransition to a new price-setting mechanism would alsobe in place. As the House will recall, in the interim, weintroduced the cancer drugs fund because patients inthe UK had significantly worse access to new cancermedicines than patients in other countries. That contributedto our poor relative cancer survival rates, and we weredetermined that it should stop and that the lack ofaccess to new cancer medicines should be tackled whilea longer-term solution was developed.
In 2010, therefore, we introduced the CDF to meet
that specific need over a defined period and within adefined budget. The achievement of the CDF has beenvital. More than 60,000 patients have accessed the cancerdrugs they need through the CDF over the past fouryears. I am immensely proud of that fact. However, thefund is not, and was never intended to be, a permanentsolution. Over time, more cancer drugs will be introduced,and if we carry on like this, an increasing number willnot be available other than through the fund. Somedrugs, such as cetuximab, Avastin and abiraterone, havealready been substantially provided through the CDF.If this continues, while other drugs are added, it willgreatly increase the cost.
I welcome the Government’s commitment to the CDF
through to 2016—it is needed while the pricing of drugsto the NHS is tackled—but that extension cannot continueindefinitely. I therefore call on the Government toreinvigorate the drive to a value-based assessment ofnew drug pricing and to incorporate that into thePPRS, so that while the Government and the NHS have525 526
4 DECEMBER 2014 Branded Medicines (NHS)[Mr Lansley]
control of the budget, the NHS can make all licensed
new medicines available through the NHS. In addition,it would incentivise innovation in the pharmaceuticalindustry and result in a fair return to industry on thecost of drug discovery.
The CDF has been necessary and successful, but it
was intended only as a bridge to a better scheme acrossthe whole NHS. It cannot bear the weight that will fallon it if we do not reform the system for the pricing ofmedicines more generally. If we can see our way to thatreform, the prospect of de-listing new or existing medicinesto the CDF can be deferred. However, reform of drugpricing has not been progressed as it should have been,or as we hoped it would be.
The new PPRS did not incorporate a value-based
assessment of the pricing of medicines payable by theNHS. It gave the Treasury a good deal, securing areal-terms reduction in the drugs budget, but a reductionvia a rebate is not transparent to the NHS. Drugcompanies setting their own price for new medicineswill continue to set prices that conflict with NICEcost-effectiveness thresholds.
Members might have noted that, yesterday, Roche
won an appeal against NICE’s final appraisal of Kadcyla,a drug used to treat HER2-positive breast cancer. Rochewon on the basis that NICE should have taken accountof the PPRS but did not do so. It argued that as abudget control mechanism, the PPRS, through its rebate,could be argued to offset the relatively high cost of amedicine on introduction. Roche won the appeal, but Ihave to say that the NICE appraisal might none the lessremain unchanged.
The rebate is not predictable; nor is it attributable to
any particular drug. It goes to the Treasury, not to theNHS. So, in practice, any NHS purchaser of a high-costmedicine must fully absorb the cost, and the opportunitycost, that paying a high price implies. This case highlightsthe theoretical link between a NICE appraisal and thePPRS, and it demonstrates how the PPRS does not inpractical terms serve to resolve the dilemma of how tointroduce high-cost medicines in the NHS.
The PPRS deal showed how much the pharmaceutical
industry in this country was willing to offer for aguaranteed rate of return and the ability to set prices atintroduction here in the UK, which can then act as areference price for a quarter of the drugs market acrossthe globe. The current PPRS of course benefits theshareholders and the boards of the big pharmaceuticalcompanies, which are able to maintain high pricesthroughout a quarter of the world on the back of highprices in the UK, even for those drugs that offer limitedclinical benefit. The other beneficiaries are those in theGovernment who are able to plan spending on drugs alittle bit better than they were before. The losers,unquestionably, are patients, who continue to be deniedaccess to the drugs that their doctors think they need.
This is not the kind of price regulation we should
have in future. Price should reflect the value of newmedicines. A new drug that offers little or no benefitrelative to the best available alternative for treatmentshould secure only a small price differential. New drugsthat tackle unmet need or substantially reduce the burdenof disease should enjoy a correspondingly substantialprice premium. By such a means, we would incentiviseinnovation and drug development, particularly in relation
to major unmet targets. We could also build a premiuminto pricing in areas in which drug development wasmost needed, such as early-stage dementia, new antibioticsor the treatment for some cancers, such as pancreaticand ovarian cancer.
The benefits of a value-based pricing system were set
out in an OECD study six years ago. But the studyrecognised—as, subsequently, did we—that the principlehad yet to be given practical effect. A year ago, theMinister responsible, Earl Howe, said that value-basedassessment would be taken forward and that it would bebrought in late this year. That is not happening. NICEwas given the task of developing value-based assessmentlast year, but in September this year, it appeared to haveput that on the back burner. That is just not goodenough.
Without value-based assessment, NICE will continue
to apply an arbitrary threshold to a measurement of thebenefits of drugs which takes into account only thequality-adjusted life year gain—the QAL Y—and end-of-lifeaddition, not the broader societal benefits or the needto promote drugs targeted at key areas of therapeuticneed and to promote innovation.
We must look to the value beyond the QAL Y . We
must ask NICE to design a clearer methodology forvalue, but not just through add-ons to its existingmethodology. It should recognise the burden of diseasein extending life and the importance of greater clinicaland patient engagement. In developing realistic pricing,it could draw on the real-world mature outcomes datafor drug use that the cancer drugs fund has given us. Itmust also draw on the work done by charities and bySanofi to examine ways in which patient engagementwith NICE could be supported. Qualitative judgmentof innovation and patient benefits must form a part ofthis broader assessment, as well as the quantitative datarelating to the QAL Y .
I congratulate Ministers for pushing the NHS to
promote innovation. We had our report in December2011 and more recently Ministers have launched theearly access to medicine scheme. The Under-Secretaryof State for Health, my hon. Friend the Member forMid Norfolk (George Freeman), has been right notonly to support that and the Medical Innovation Billbut to launch a review of how innovation processes canbe enhanced in the NHS.
How perverse would it be if, at the same time, licensed
and effective medicines were not approved or availablethrough the NHS? In recent months, a number of drugshave not been approved by NICE, such as Kadcyla,Alimta for lung cancer and abiraterone for prostatecancer prior to chemotherapy. Several of those casesdemonstrate the problem of paying for new personalisedmedicines, but we cannot see the difficult process ofintroducing new drugs being made even worse by thede-listing of drugs by the cancer drugs fund.
I hope that in response to the debate Ministers will
tell NICE to reinvigorate and make progress on thework on value-based assessment, while developing anew methodology in the way that I have described. TheGovernment should work with industry to developthe pharmaceutical price regulation scheme, so thatpharmaceutical companies can, within the overallframework, continue to set the price of their medicinesat introduction but accept that the NHS should receive527 528
4 DECEMBER 2014 Branded Medicines (NHS) Branded Medicines (NHS)a rebate if, and to the extent that, a value-based assessment
shows a lower price. That would lead to drug-specificrebates that could then be incorporated within theoverall rebate for budget control purposes. In my view,such a system must be in place by 2016, so that thecancer drugs fund can be maintained between now andthen and can be the bridge that it was intended to be,while having a realistic time-limited remit.
Only by pushing forward with such measures can we
expect in future to offer doctors in the NHS the assurancethat they can access the medicines and treatments theythink best for their patients and give patients the confidencethat the NHS, as a comprehensive free service, is ableand willing to provide whatever treatment is in theirbest interests. I am grateful for the time and attentionof the House.
4.37 pm
Mr Jamie Reed (Copeland) (Lab): Time is short, so I
shall keep my remarks brief, but it is a shame to truncatesuch an important debate on a matter that touchesmany lives.
The availability of medicines in our national health
service affects millions of families throughout the countryand with that in mind I must thank the right hon.Member for South Cambridgeshire (Mr Lansley) andcongratulate him on securing the debate. I also thankthe Backbench Business Committee for ensuring thatthe debate was heard. I know that the right hon. Gentlemantried to make progress on these issues when he wasHealth Secretary and I am sure that he is frustrated bythe lack of progress in more recent years. In addition, Iam sure that he will be amazed and potentially aghastwhen he hears that I agree with a great deal of what hesaid.
As I say, this is an important issue affecting millions
of patients who rely on these drugs everyday. Memberson both sides of the House want to see progress onimproving access and ensuring that more people get thedrugs they need. The issue was brought into sharp focusrecently when, in September, NICE announced that itwas not going ahead with its proposed value-basedassessment reforms. That this was in part due to a lackof consensus in stakeholder consultation submissionsto the proposals serves to highlight how complex anissue it is. We all accept that.
There are clear problems with access to medicines, as
demonstrated clearly by recent publications from theOffice of Health Economics and the Association of theBritish Pharmaceutical Industry. I want to make anumber of points from those publications in my speech.There are issues, too, about the proposed changes to thecancer drugs fund, which have been highlighted by theconcerns of charities such as Breast Cancer Care, that Ishall come to later. None of them will be a surprise tothe Minister.
A vital tool in improving access to treatments is the
pharmaceutical price regulation scheme, the latest iterationof which came into effect this year. Some questionsneed answering about it. In 2010, the Conservativemanifesto included a commitment to increasing accessto drugs. The commitment was echoed and bolteddown in the coalition agreement, which stated:
“We will reform NICE and move to a system of value-based
pricing”.As we have heard and discussed, value-based pricing
was meant to be introduced in January this year whenthe drug pricing agreement between the Governmentand pharmaceutical industry expired, but despite thecomments in the coalition agreement, when the newdrug pricing agreement, the 2014 pharmaceutical priceregulation scheme, was published in November 2013 itcontained no plans either to introduce value-based pricingin 2014 or on the promised reform of NICE’s processestowards evaluating how treatments would be madeavailable on the NHS.
When proposals were finally brought forward this
year, they included not value-based pricing but value-basedassessment, which is altogether different. The planswould have included two new modifiers entitled “burdenof illness” and “wider societal impact”. The burden ofillness modifier would have replaced the current end-of-lifecriterion. The burden of illness criterion that wouldhave been introduced is already largely counted in thecurrent quality-adjusted life-year measures. There arealso wide-ranging issues with the other suggestions, soit was no surprise that, after lengthy consultation, NICEconfirmed that the plans to introduce the changes hadunfortunately been shelved. What this means in practice,though, is that the Government have failed to deliver ona key commitment, the fulfilment of which many peoplewere looking forward to. I should be grateful if theMinister would reflect on progress to date.
Access to medicines is key because the UK is lagging
behind other countries. From analysis of more than60 medicines launched in the UK, the Office of HealthEconomics found that people living in the UK are lesslikely to have access to a new medicine for the first fiveyears after its launch than people living in other countries.That shows clearly that reform is vital.
Roger Williams (Brecon and Radnorshire) (LD): Does
the hon. Gentleman agree that one of the real problemsis that some of these treatments, such as abiraterone,are not available in Wales but are available in England?That is leading to people leaving Wales and taking upresidence in England in order to get that treatment.
Mr Reed: I am grateful for the question. Without doubt,
there are issues that need to be addressed on both sidesof the border.
One major part of the issues that we are discussing
today is the pharmaceutical price regulation scheme,which caps the expenditure of the NHS on brandedmedicines. It has existed since the 1950s. It is an excellentscheme in principle but must work properly in practice.Given that there has been essentially no parliamentarydebate on the PPRS, I should be grateful if the Ministerwould explain a bit more how the new agreement isintended to work in practice.
As I understand it, if the NHS exceeds the agreed
expenditure, as the right hon. Member for SouthCambridgeshire said, the money is rebated back to theTreasury. But given that the outgoing moneys willpresumably be taken from clinical commissioning groupprescription budgets, can the Minster explain how theCCG in question will actually feel the benefit of thePPRS? If the rebate stays in the centre, rather thanbeing reimbursed to CCGs, how will the PPRS work asa tool with which to increase access to treatments? Hasthe Minister considered how the rebate might be better529 530
4 DECEMBER 2014 Branded Medicines (NHS) Branded Medicines (NHS)[Mr Jamie Reed]
used for incentivising improvements in access? What
can be done to speed up drug accessibility and reducethe duplication by CCGs of work already undertakenby NICE? That is clogging up the system and slowingdown access to new medicines.
The Minister will be aware that at Health questions
last week I raised some of the genuine concerns ofpatients, such as Clive Stone in the Prime Minister’sconstituency, and charities, such as Breast Cancer Care,about the cancer drugs fund. As the Minister knows,the overspend in the cancer drugs fund last year and theway in which it operates has led to its being underconsiderable pressure, and many in the industry believeit to be unsustainable. The former Health Secretary hasbeen absolutely clear that it was always intended to be abridge, and I welcome his candour on that.
The issue with any new medicines, which I know
NHS England is now looking at, is how to balanceclinical benefit and cost-effectiveness. None of us wouldpretend that that is an easy task, but it is clear that itneeds to be done in a much clearer and more transparentway than is currently proposed, and I should be gratefulif the Minister would set out how patients will beinvolved in the evaluation of drugs and represented inthat process at the meeting of the cancer drugs fundclinical panel later this month.
One way to improve access to medicines would have
been to back the Off-patent Drugs Bill that was beforethis House only a few weeks ago. That would haveimproved access to many drugs for many people but, asthe Minister is aware—he was speaking opposite me atthe time—the Government refused to support it. Willthe Minister again take the time to explain why theGovernment opposed that piece of legislation, whichoriginated from one of their own Members? It wascertainly supported by Labour Members. The innovativemedicines review has the potential to do real good inthis area. I should be grateful if the Minister wouldspeak to that, too, in some detail in the time availablefor his speech.
I realise that time is short, so I will draw my remarks
to a close. We all want to see improvements to accessand we are all desperate—I use the word in its accuratesense—for progress on this, so will the Minister set outwhat action he will take over the next few months andwhat progress he realistically expects to make before theelection?
4.44 pm
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health
(George Freeman): It is a pleasure to respond to this
debate and to follow the hon. Member for Copeland(Mr Reed) and my right hon. Friend the Member forSouth Cambridgeshire (Mr Lansley). It is a shame thatthere are not more Members present, because I knowthat the debate has been warmly welcomed across theHouse. I congratulate the Backbench Business Committeeon granting it and my right hon. Friend on securing it.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
my right hon. Friend for all his work in this field, bothas the Member for South Cambridgeshire—I do notthink there is a constituency that more represents thiscluster—and as the former Secretary of State for Health,because he led many of the initiatives that he spokeabout so eloquently this afternoon. He is as well placed
as anybody to describe the evolution of policy in thatspace, and it is my great privilege, as the first Ministerfor life sciences, to inherit that baton of leadership.
I also want to acknowledge the very helpful comments
and questions from my hon. Friend the Member forNorth Herefordshire (Bill Wiggin) on whether there ismore of an opportunity for the NHS to become more ofa partner in the development of novel medicines. He isabsolutely right, and I will come to that in a moment.He also raised the question of off-label drugs, as did thehon. Member for Copeland, and I will also address thatshortly. The hon. Gentleman also requested an updateon progress in this field and some detail on the review ofinnovative medicines that I announced two weeks ago. Iam grateful for his support for that and for his recognitionof NICE’s work on value-based assessment.
My right hon. Friend the Member for South
Cambridgeshire set out eloquently, and incredibly helpfullyfor the House, the challenge we face and the evolutionof policy in this area. He talked fluently about thechallenge facing the Government, and indeed all maturewestern democracies, with an ageing population, ademographic time bomb and the rise of chronic diseases.As the Chancellor reminded us in yesterday’s autumnstatement, we inherited a very serious structural deficitin the public finances and huge pressure on our budgets.We have to balance the requirement to spend our drugsbudget as effectively as we can for patient benefit, but ina way that supports our leadership in medical researchfor the benefit of patients. That goes to the heart of mymission as the new Minister for life sciences: how do weembrace science, research and innovation so that wespend every health pound more effectively? It is aboutembracing precision medicines, cutting out waste andensuring that we deliver maximum health benefit forpatients through our health budget, but in a way thatattracts inward investment to our economy to equip usbetter to pay for the modern medicines that we will allneed.
My right hon. Friend highlighted that NICE has led
the world in health economics on the 20th centurymodel, which is really based on an averaging of healtheconomic benefits, as he explained, and that is underincreasing pressure from some of the breakthroughs inscience that are bringing us a new generation of stratifiedand personalised—in some cases, literally—medicines,which do not fit well with the model of averaged,whole-population health economic assessments.
My right hon. Friend made the point fluently that it
is ironic that we are a leading centre for research, butunless we also become a leading centre for adoptingthese new medicines, we will struggle to retain that. Weset that out very clearly three years ago in the lifesciences strategy. The Prime Minister was very clearabout that. We do not believe that we can rest on ourlaurels simply as a 20th economy with a strongpharmaceutical footprint; in the 21st century we have touse all our resources, including our NHS, to acceleratethe discovery of new medicines and their adoption intothe system.
Mr Reed: I wish the Minister every success in that
mission and offer the fulsome support of the Oppositionin ensuring its success, but does he agree—I do not wishto divert him too much—that critical to that success isthat Britain remains in the European Union?531 532
4 DECEMBER 2014 Branded Medicines (NHS) Branded Medicines (NHS)George Freeman: I thank the hon. Gentleman for that
warm support for this mission. We are ambitious forthis country in life sciences research, and ambitious forEurope too. One of the things I am exercised by is thedanger of the European Union putting in place a regulatoryframework that does not support 21st-century leadershipin regenerative medicine, in stem cells, and in the use ofdata. In the new year, I will lead a delegation to theEuropean Commission to highlight the fact that thisnew landscape requires a new regulatory framework. Ivery much hope that we can persuade the EuropeanUnion to embrace that so that Britain can lead in aEurope that leads in a global sector.
My right hon. Friend talked about institutional and
cultural barriers to rapid adoption of new medicinesand the need for a new system. I strongly agree with thetenor of his thinking. It must be a system in which weput patients right at the heart of the assessment of needand in which clinicians are empowered and supportedto make decisions based on what their patient needs.The new model of 21st-century research and medicineis about accelerating a much more patient-centred modelof research, not just so that we design drugs aroundpatients and their genetics and data, but so that thepatient voice is stronger in the allocation of resources.That is a challenging but important agenda that weneed to embrace.
My right hon. Friend reminded us that this formed a
lot of the thinking behind the original concept of value-based pricing and the need for us to move towards anew mechanism for reimbursing innovations on thebasis of the impact that they have in populations. Istrongly support all that. He highlighted the cancerdrugs fund—a really important measure that seeks tomake sure that, in cancer, the therapeutic area that hasmost challenged the traditional method of healtheconomics, we do not allow patients to suffer from lackof access given the increasing stratification of newdrugs that do not fit well with the NICE model. I paytribute to his leadership on this. I am very proud that wehave managed to increase the funding of the cancerdrugs fund at a very difficult time for the public finances,with another £160 million this year bringing the total to£280 million. More than 60,000 patients have benefitedfrom that.
My right hon. Friend is right, however, to signal that
the cancer drugs fund is, in essence, a stop-gap mechanismto make sure that we are able to update the systems,protocols and procedures within NICE for adoptingand procuring innovative medicines. We do not intendto have a specific fund for every therapeutic area or,indeed, additional assessment measures within NHSEngland on top of those already faced by the industrythrough NICE. It is crucial that we use this window ofopportunity to put in place the new system to adaptNICE’s mechanisms and procedures to the new landscape.That is precisely what the review that I announced acouple of weeks ago is about.
My right hon. Friend made a number of comments
about the pharmaceutical price regulation scheme. Hisoverall message that price should reflect the value ofnew medicines and that we should, as far as we can, payon results, paying a premium to innovations that haveparticularly high impacts and patient benefits. I suggestthat that should apply equally to med tech as topharmaceuticals. That is part of what was originallyconceived of in the value-based pricing proposals that
he brought forward. I agree with all that, and I think itis the direction of travel. In a moment, I will explainhow the review and the work we are pursuing in theDepartment of Health is intended to pick up thatthinking and drive it forward.
I welcome my right hon. Friend’s reference to the
importance of new methodologies. I have discussed thiswith NICE. He will not be surprised to hear, as it is anorganisation that is constantly looking to update itsprocedures, that it is actively looking at these challengesand welcomed my review as creating a forum for it toshare things with industry and charities. I particularlywelcomed his mentioning the role of charities. Increasingly,we will see charities as sponsors of drugs alongside bigpharma and small companies. As he said, the system isvery heavily geared around big pharma as the maindeveloper of new drugs, but that is increasingly not thecase. We need a policy and reimbursement landscapethat reflects the needs of not-for-profit and smallercompany sponsors.
Clinical validation of whether an innovative drug or
device is going to work in patients is key, and I knowthat that is the most valuable moment of all fororganisations, because I used to work with them. Weshould not forget that there is also value in the developersof an innovation being told that it will not work inpatients. The “slow no” is the death knell for so manyinnovative companies and charities. We should look toembrace a model in which we can add value by helpingthe developers of innovations not to pursue those thatwill not work well and to target those that can bechannelled towards those patients who will benefit most.
I hear loud and clear my right hon. Friend’s call for
us to urge NICE to develop a more value-based assessmentand to explore all mechanisms in the PPRS for innovativemedicines. I am very happy to agree with those twothings and take up the challenge to support them. Iagree with my right hon. Friend’s analysis that we havea window of opportunity in which it is important thatwe set out a new framework so that, beyond the cancerdrugs fund, NICE is able to provide a holistic,comprehensive model for assessing the new range ofmedicines that come on stream, and that we do not haveto set up additional funds for different types of medicineswith additional burdens of assessment both within andoutside NICE. That is precisely what the review I haveannounced is about and I will deal with some of thosespecific points.
My right hon. Friend made an excellent speech that
captured and set the scene and the challenge we face. Iwill summarise in my own words the problem. We aremoving from a 20th-century model of drug discoveryand pharmaceutical innovation whereby typically a newdrug takes 10 to 15 years to come to market and costs$1 billion to $1.5 billion. It follows a linear process thatstarts with deep university biological research and then,if we are lucky, it gets spun out into a company orlicensed and sent to industry. If we are lucky, it will thenget financed through various stages and taken throughphases 1, 2, 3 and 4 of trials, with hugely costly internationalstudies. Then it is approved as safe by the Medicinesand Healthcare products Regulatory Agency or theEuropean Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products.Then it is approved by NICE as being of suitablecost-benefit for recommended use in the NHS, and thenit has to be taken up by clinicians in the service.533 534
4 DECEMBER 2014 Branded Medicines (NHS) Branded Medicines (NHS)[George Freeman]
The truth is that that model is not working well
enough for anyone, but most importantly, as my righthon. Friend has pointed out, it is not working forpatients. It is coming under pressure for a series ofreasons, partly because the industry is struggling withthe time cost of a 10 to 15-year development pipeline,leaving it with innovations it needs premium pricing forto justify the huge sunk costs at a time when we arefacing a demographic time bomb. Given the rising costof disease, we need to get maximum value out of everypound. We cannot afford to pay premium prices forevery new innovation, so we need a new model.
The great challenge that that represents is also a great
opportunity for this country, because the new modelwill be about designing innovations around particularpatient groups. Yesterday, we believed that what wethought were blockbuster diseases required blockbusterdrugs, but today, the more we know about disease,patient data and genomics, the more we know thatcertain patients respond to the same disease—and, indeed,the same drug—in different ways. If we can use thatinsight with industrial partners, a new generation oftreatments can be designed around patient groups andintroduced to them dramatically earlier, which is acompletely new value proposition, principally for patients,but also for the NHS. That will allow us to becomesomething of a partner in innovation and unlock thebasis of a new model of reimbursement.
I do not pretend that that is easy, or we would be able
to do it overnight. We will certainly not be able to do itby Christmas, by the election or even within a year ortwo. It might involve a 10-year programme of deep andlong-term change, but we are definitely committed toembracing it and to laying a policy foundation for it.
I want to say something about the PPRS, because it
plays a very important role in this landscape. We negotiatedand agreed this important deal with the industry. Itcontains mechanisms for supporting innovative medicines,not least the exclusion for small companies—those witha turnover of less than £5 million—and the exclusion ofnew medicines brought on stream from January thisyear. The review we have announced—
5p m
Motion lapsed (Standing Order No. 9(3)).Antisocial Behaviour (South Manchester)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House
do now adjourn. —(Damian Hinds.)
5p m
Mr John Leech (Manchester, Withington) (LD): I am
delighted to have the opportunity to raise the issue oflate-night antisocial behaviour in south Manchester,and specifically in the south-east Fallowfield and Ladybarnpart of my constituency.
The area is next to the Owens Park university halls of
residence campus. Since I went to school in the area morethan 25 years ago, it has seen an enormous transformation.It was traditionally a family neighbourhood, but manyfamilies and long-time residents have moved out andbeen replaced by a huge influx of students, with traditionalfamily homes often converted and extended into housesin multiple occupation and student flats. That has resultedin some roads in the area being occupied almost entirelyby students, with only the odd long-term resident stillremaining.
As student numbers rose, more and more families
moved out and houses were converted into studenthomes, which in turn persuaded other long-time residentsto follow suit. That is often described as “studentification”—where a huge proportion of residents in a neighbourhoodare students. It has created a number of challenges, notleast rows and rows of empty properties during thesummer holidays and the impact of that on shops andthe local economy. One of the greatest problems that ithas created is the noise and disruption caused by late-nightparties.
I want to make it clear from the outset that I am not
suggesting that all students are causing a problem—farfrom it—and that I am not suggesting for a second thatstudents are responsible for the majority of antisocialand nuisance behaviour across my whole constituency.Over the years, as a councillor and then as an MP, Ihave dealt with many cases of noisy neighbours andantisocial behaviour, but in this part of the constituencyit is certainly the case that a small minority of studentshave damaged the reputation of students and universitiesby making the lives of other residents a misery withlate-night parties.
Many of those parties seem to be getting bigger and
bigger. Reportedly, up to 300 or 400 people attend someof the largest. Before the summer, one party estimatedto have been attended by 300 students celebrating theend of their exams resulted in the collapse of the entirelounge floor of the house. In recent weeks, the situationhas got worse, and residents have come to the end oftheir tether.
I want to share with the House the comments of a
handful of residents, which show the real frustrationfelt by local people. One resident on Clifton avenuesaid:
“Blood curdling screaming, drunken shouting and singing
echoing around the neighbourhood took me out of my house at10.15 pm—no point getting ready for bed. The rear car park waspacked with students and others already drunk were convergingon the house—the right-hand front door was wide open. As Iwatched, students started streaming out of the car park ontoEgerton Road heading for Wilmslow Road. I counted 100 beforeI gave up. About half were carrying opened bottles of wine orcans of beer, the majority were aggressively drunk. They werewearing fancy dress—white dungarees striped tights and socks535 536 4 DECEMBER 2014 Branded Medicines (NHS)and heavy make-up. I have rarely felt so intimidated—the numbers
surging past, the drunken loudness. More groups were comingalong Egerton Road. The group hysteria was scary. Childrenwoken, hearing, witnessing—what is the effect on them?”
A second resident on Clifton avenue said:
“I can confirm that this drunken yelling and shouting is still
continuing (12.06 am). The level of disturbance is unbelievable.The sound clip is from my bedroom via mobile phone, thechanters are streets away, not visible from here.”
A third resident said:
“I have been woken this morning at 1.30 by the 10 students
living next door standing outside the house talking and drinking.Sometimes living on Clifton avenue is comparable to visiting azoo of wild animals. I’m under the belief that the only way tocontrol the appalling behaviour is night patrols or to request thecity council introduce CCTV to the area”.
One resident of Egerton road said:
“The noise on the 22nd was the worst I have heard so far. I was
unable to sleep without shutting all windows and using earplugs—essentially we are being forced to barricade ourselves in. Some ofthe screaming girls worry me too as I can’t tell if something bad ishappening or not. Perhaps we need to start routinely ringing 999if concerned that someone might be in danger.”
One resident on Derby road said:
“We were also disturbed around the same time last night by
loud shouting/chanting outside. Suspect the group passed alongDerby road, though by the time I was able to get to the window,there was nobody to be seen, though I could still hear thenoise. My immediate thought was ‘Oh no, it’s Wednesday night,so probably one of those sports groups’. The Wednesday nightsports social events certainly do concern us. The groups movingaround our neighbourhood are usually large and very noisy, oftenchanting loud enough to be heard clearly from other streets, andas we know from previously, the content may well bring theuniversities into disrepute”.
Another Derby road resident said:
“A group of about 15-20 piled out…about the same time, in
the street and running into gardens, a bit noisy—but to be honestwe were just pleased it was before 10.30. They had been pre-loadingagain…and were in fancy dress (as oompa loompas from “Charlieand the Chocolate Factory”—but we had a Willy Wonka too!). Iagree they were all quite excitable, but after hanging around for15 minutes they all disappeared off to Egerton and we were notdisturbed on their return. Lots of litter for me to clear up thismorning though, this is becoming a bigger and bigger problem asthe street cleaning seems to stop at Egerton and ignore DerbyRoad”.
One resident on Raveley avenue said:
“We have some new neighbours, they moved in yesterday. It
was sad to see my neighbour go, she was born here but got fed upof the noisy parties. I hope the new people stay and are not drivenaway by noisy students.”
Finally, a resident on Brook road said:
“It’s just one big party for the students. Never mind us working
people. We should go to the media and get them to make adocumentary, ‘Life in the Fallowfield Zoo’”.
For too long antisocial behaviour law has not worked
for local residents in south Manchester if student partiesin local houses get out of hand. The situation has gotworse, fuelled by cheap supermarket alcohol—DrinkWise calculates that alcohol is 61% more affordablethan in 1980. Add in the disastrous 24-hour licensingpolicy of the previous Government, and we have alethal cocktail of excessive drinking long into the earlyhours. Parties where too many people turn up for themto be safe for anybody, and industrial strength soundsystems that play all night, cause problems for familieswith work and school the next day. Despite copiousantisocial behaviour legislation from the years of TonyBlair’s “Respect” agenda, the police and city council
have too often felt unable to intervene when big partiesare taking place and causing maximum nuisance forneighbours.
What is the solution? Local residents have been working
with the council, the police, Manchester Metropolitanuniversity and Manchester university, and I pay tributeto the time and effort that local people, the communityguardians and the South East Fallowfield ResidentsGroup have invested in tackling the problem. In particularI pay tribute to Sue Hare, who has been unfairly criticisedby a certain councillor simply for raising the concernsof local residents and the welfare and safety of students.
Action has been taken by the two universities to try
to tackle antisocial behaviour. MMU is involved withthe Home Office project to change the student drinkingculture, while the university of Manchester has introduceda new code of conduct for students that covers theirbehaviour off campus as well as on university premises.Sanctions can range from fines to potential exclusionfrom the university, with the first disciplinary case currentlygoing through. The university is hoping to introduce anelement of restorative justice—getting victims andperpetrators in the same room. That could help, butlocal residents are clear that sanctions must be severeenough to act as a deterrent to future antisocial behaviour.Both universities have been proactive in making studentsaware of their responsibilities to be good neighbours,and have promised further action if that does notchange behaviour. That must happen if there is noimprovement.
The coalition Government must take credit for the
Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014,and I thank Home Office Ministers—particularly myright hon. Friend the Member for Lewes (NormanBaker), a former Home Office Minister—for giving localpolice more effective powers to tackle antisocial behaviourand provide better protection for victims and communities.
In Fallowfield, Inspector Sutcliffe has been leading
police action to tackle and shut down those parties.Seventeen late-night parties were attended in one week,culminating in the new powers under the Act being usedto close down one of them. More than 400 people wereinside the building. A number of them were very drunkand threatening, requiring 14 police officers to containthe situation, and resulting in two arrests of people whorefused to leave. They subsequently spent the nightsobering up in custody. At the same time, the eightresidents were issued with notices to attend the magistratescourt, although the summons was later rescinded.
On that occasion, the police were fortunate to be able
to close the party down quickly. The legislation requiresthe police to issue a court date alongside the closurenotice. The police had pre-arranged a court date inpreparation for closing down a different party that hadbeen advertised in advance but subsequently failed tomaterialise. Therefore, when the other party erupted,the police could close it down because they had alreadysecured a court date.
A couple of weeks ago, I spent an evening out with
Inspector Sutcliffe while he was on duty. I discussedwith him, and saw for myself, the challenges the policeface in taking appropriate action. He has welcomed thenew legislation, but has suggested that it could betweaked to make it more effective from an operationalperspective. The new legislation is excellent in dealing537 538
4 DECEMBER 2014 Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)[Mr John Leech]
with persistent noise and antisocial behaviour at a
certain address, but Inspector Sutcliffe has recommendedthat it would be much easier for the police to be able toclose down an impromptu party without an advancecourt date—it would be much easier to send the courtdate out later when a three-month month closure isbeing sought. When only a 24-hour immediate closureis necessary, it would be easier if the police couldexercise the power without the need to take the case tocourt. I would be grateful if the Minister could addressthose suggestions.
When I was out with Inspector Sutcliffe, I was very
impressed by the way in which he was proactivelytackling the problem—he did not simply wait for asituation to get out of hand, but proactively approachedgroups of young people on the streets or milling aroundoutside student houses. However, such policing doesnot come without costs—£3,000 in staff costs in atwo-week period, with resources having to be divertedfrom other policing initiatives. The police have limitedresources, and closing down parties has proved to bevery labour intensive. Residents understandably wantmore visible policing, which has clearly made a differencefrom what I saw while out on patrol. However, that canonly ever be a short-term solution, given the limitedresources.
I therefore argue that Manchester city council needs
to step up to the mark. I have argued for years that thecouncil ought to have a 24-hour environmental healthreporting line so that residents in private sector housingcan take action when problems occur, not just after theevent. Residents are also clear that street warden patrolsare required at night, which would have the doubleimpact of tackling antisocial behaviour and makingour streets safer for everyone.
Labour councillors try to lay the blame on the
Government, saying the problem is to do with cuts tothe council, but the problem has been going on for years—all the way through 13 years of a Labour Government.Other councils have 24-hour reporting lines, but it doesnot appear to be a priority of our local council.
The council needs to look at what action the licensing
department can take to deal with student houses thatappear to being turned into commercial venues—theyhave security at the door and charge up to £70 to enterparties. The council needs to be using every opportunityto cause as much hassle as possible for the organisers, sothat they think twice about hosting parties in future.
Given the council’s record, I am sure it will continue
to argue that there is no money to fund the necessarychanges, but the reality is that there is no political will.Plans for the expansion of the university Owens Parkand an additional 800 students on the campus in Fallowfieldwere recently announced. That has the potential tomake the situation worse. An additional 800 first-yearstudents could lead to up to an additional 1,600 secondand third-year students in subsequent years. The planshave raised concerns about the potential for even moreantisocial behaviour in future. I argue that, if expansionis going to be allowed, we should ensure that there is aproper mix of student accommodation on the site, withall the additional capacity available for non-freshersand the type of accommodation that second and third-yearstudents will want to live in. If properly managed, thatcould result in fewer second and third-year studentsliving off campus, because good-quality appropriate
accommodation would be available in the area, but onthe campus.
At the same time, conditions should be attached to
any application for a contribution to be paid to helptackle antisocial behaviour and fund a 24-hour reportingline and warden patrols. That would help to address thefunding issue that the council continues to hide behind.
In conclusion, I very much welcome the new legislation
that has helped the police to tackle late-night noisyparties. I urge the Minister to look carefully at suggestionsfor improvements to the legislation that would make iteven more effective. I recognise the need for universitiesto be seen to be taking effective and firm action todiscourage a repetition of bad behaviour, and I urge thecouncil to take the necessary steps to assist the policeand the local community to tackle what has become areal problem in this part of my constituency.
5.15 pm
Damian Hinds (East Hampshire) (Con): I congratulate
my hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Withington(Mr Leech) on bringing this important and timely debateto the Floor of the House. The House will have beenstruck—and shocked—by some of the incidents that herecounted from his constituency. Like him, I pay tributeto what our police, including Greater Manchester police,do in this area, alongside the other relevant agencies.
Antisocial behaviour is a very important subject that
affects many people and communities in different ways—including in my own constituency, and, I am sure, theconstituencies of other hon. Members here today. Iknow a little about the setting in Withington, as it isvery near to where I grew up. If left unchecked, antisocialbehaviour can prevent the law-abiding majority fromenjoying public spaces or even feeling safe in their ownhomes. That is why the coalition Government made itclear that we would introduce effective measures totackle antisocial behaviour and low level crime in orderbetter to better people. That is what we have done.
The reforms we introduced through the Anti-social
Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014, which myhon. Friend mentioned, focus the response to antisocialbehaviour firmly on the needs of victims, allowingagencies better to protect the communities they serve byquickly clamping down on problems whenever andwherever they occur. Where individuals do not respondto informal approaches, or where they are causing seriousnuisance, front-line professionals can, where appropriateand proportionate, use the new faster and more flexibleantisocial behaviour powers that came into force on20 October.
It is widely acknowledged that the higher education
sector in Manchester makes a significant contribution,economically and culturally, with its world class universitiesand the annual influx of tens of thousands of students.Many are drawn to private rented accommodation inFallowfield and Withington, as well as to halls of residence.It is of course also the case, as my hon. Friend was atpains to point out, that the vast majority of students arelaw abiding, enjoying the richness and diversity of thegreat city of Manchester. However, and as ever, theconduct of a small minority can cause great harm anddistress to others. The authorities must be able to actand use their professional judgment to resolve suchproblems where they occur.539 540
4 DECEMBER 2014 Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)In that respect, I note that the restorative justice
approach has been piloted in five wards in southManchester: Burnage, Fallowfield, Levenshulme, OldMoat and Withington. Its purpose is to resolve issues ofantisocial behaviour. Early and informal interventionswill often be successful in stopping such antisocialbehaviour. The aim of the pilots is to establish clearstandards of behaviour and reinforce the message thatantisocial behaviour will not be tolerated.
I am sure that my hon. Friend welcomes, as he
outlined in his speech, the fact that ManchesterMetropolitan university is one of seven higher educationinstitutions taking part, with the National Union ofStudents and funded by the Home Office, in the alcoholimpact project. The project is developing an accreditationmark—a sort of kitemark—that will be awarded touniversities committing to actions such as: preventingalcohol-related initiation ceremonies; tackling participationin irresponsible pub crawls; and monitoring antisocialbehaviour. Manchester Metropolitan university has alsocommitted to increase the number of alcohol-free studentevents and to promote responsible alcohol consumptionat other events. There is much that institutions can dothrough policy, procedure, retailing and accommodation,and it is good to see some of these coming forward.
Successful partnership working, as acknowledged by
my hon. Friend, along with early and informal action,can reap rewards in tackling antisocial behaviour, but,where more formal interventions are needed, in specificcases we have given front-line professionals new andmore effective powers to enable them to act quickly todeal with a range of problems, whether noise, nuisanceor drunken and rowdy behaviour in public places.
If the police or a council officer has reason to believe
that the use of premises has resulted in nuisance to membersof the public or that that could happen, a closure noticecan be used to protect victims and communities byquickly closing premises that are causing nuisance ordisorder. Of course, those who habitually reside in thepremises cannot be excluded for the first 48 hours, butvisitors could be excluded completely from the property.As the power can be used preventively, the local communityneed not suffer while waiting for action, so the harmcaused by a party could be prevented altogether.
Moreover, where there is more serious nuisance to
others, the police or the council can apply to the magistratescourt for a closure order to close the premises for up tosix months. I have noted the concerns raised by my hon.Friend that the new closure power does not allow thepolice to shut down unruly student parties immediately“on the spot” as it were. I have heard what he has saidon this point and the commentary and critique that hebrought forward from Inspector Sutcliffe, and we cancertainly look at all suggestions for improving the legislationto make it even more effective for front-line professionalsto protect victims and communities.
The police or local council can now also use new
community protection notices, also introduced underthe 2014 Act. These are intended to deal with particularongoing problems or nuisances that are having a detrimentaleffect on the quality of life of those in the community,and where the conduct is persistent or continuing and isunreasonable. For example, this could cover noise nuisance,as well as littering, fly-tipping or graffiti. Such a noticemay impose requirements to stop doing certain things,to do certain things, or to take reasonable steps toachieve certain stated results.The new power is available to the council and the
police, including designated police community supportofficers, and can be issued against any person aged 16 orover, or against a body, including a business. Before thenotice can be issued, the officer must serve the individualwith a written warning to make it clear that if they donot stop the antisocial behaviour, they could be servedwith a community protection notice.
Police officers in uniform and designated PCSOs can
also use the new dispersal power in public places toprevent or to stop members of the public from beingharassed, alarmed or distressed, or to prevent crime ordisorder. The new power combines the most effectiveelements of the previous dispersal powers into a single,less bureaucratic power. It allows the police to deal withproblems instantly and nip them in the bud before theantisocial behaviour escalates, by issuing a direction tothe individual to get them to leave a specified area forup to 48 hours.
The new dispersal power must be authorised in writing
by an officer of at least the rank of inspector, specifyingthe grounds on which it is given, which is an importantsafeguard. Furthermore, authorisation may be givenand the dispersal power may be used only after regardhas been had to the rights of freedom of expression andfreedom of assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of theEuropean convention on human rights.
Local councils can also use public spaces protection
orders to ensure that the law-abiding majority can useand enjoy their public spaces safe from nuisance anddisorder. The order can be used to deal with a particularnuisance or problem in a particular area. This power isavailable to local councils and works by allowing thecouncil to impose conditions on the use of a publicplace, which apply to everyone, to certain categories ofpeople at certain times or in specific circumstances.
The test for issuing the order will be that the local
authority reasonably believes that the behaviour is orwill be detrimental to the local community’s quality oflife, and that the impact justifies restrictions being putin place. The behaviour must also be, or likely to be,continuing or persistent and unreasonable. Such anorder must also be published in accordance with regulationsmade by the Secretary of State to ensure that people areproperly informed that it is in place.
Before using this new power, however, the local council
must consult the chief officer of police, the police andcrime commissioner, the owner or occupier of the landand any representatives of the local community theyconsider appropriate. This could involve people livingnearby or regular users of the space. Again, such anorder may be made only after consideration has beengiven to the rights of freedom of expression and freedomof assembly set out in articles 10 and 11 of the convention.A public spaces protection order, for example, can beused to restrict the consumption of alcohol in a publicplace when the requisite test has been met.
My hon. Friend asked whether councils should provide
a 24-hour helpline so that people may report instancesof antisocial or threatening behaviour. That is, of course,a matter for councils to determine, although discussionstake place in partnership with police and police andcrime commissioners. No doubt my hon. Friend willwish to continue to raise the issue with Manchester citycouncil.541 542
4 DECEMBER 2014 Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)[Damian Hinds]
Manchester was one of four areas that trialled the
“community trigger”, which proved in several cases tobe an effective way of ensuring that action was taken todeal with persistent or previously overlooked antisocialbehaviour. We want information on how it can be usedto be made widely available to the public. The triggercan be exercised not just by victims themselves, but onbehalf of victims—with their consent—by, for instance,a friend or carer, or, indeed, by a councillor or Memberof Parliament.Let me again congratulate my hon. Friend on securing
this important debate. I hope that I have been able tomake clear how seriously the coalition takes the issuewhen it occurs, in Greater Manchester and elsewhere,and to explain the steps that have been taken to improvethe response. It is still early days for the new antisocialbehaviour powers, and we will continue to work on theiruse with front-line professionals.
Question put and agreed to.
5.26 pm
House adjourned.543 544
4 DECEMBER 2014 Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)Antisocial Behaviour (South
Manchester)Westminster Hall
Thursday 4 December 2014
[MRPHILIP HOLLOBONE in the Chair ]
BACKBENCH BUSINESS
Small Business Saturday
Motion made, and Question proposed, That the sitting
be now adjourned. —(Damian Hinds.)
1.30 pm
Mr Philip Hollobone (in the Chair): The subject of
this afternoon’s debate is small business Saturday, whichoccurs in two days’ time on Saturday 6 December. Thedebate will be ably led by the hon. Member for City ofChester (Stephen Mosley).
Stephen Mosley (City of Chester) (Con): Thank you,
Mr Hollobone, for the opportunity to highlight thecrucial importance of having thriving, popular andsuccessful small businesses in our towns and cities, andto emphasise the important role that small businessSaturday plays in helping small businesses to achievetheir potential. Small businesses are the lifeblood of oureconomy. They account for 99% of all businesses in theUK. They employ some 15 million people across thecountry and they account for half our private sectorGDP . Small businesses play such an important role inour national economy that if every small business tookon one new member of staff, we would eliminateunemployment overnight.
Alok Sharma (Reading West) (Con): I congratulate
my hon. Friend on securing this incredibly importantdebate. He is making the case for small businesses upand down the country, which will have welcomed someof the statements from the Chancellor yesterday. Doesmy hon. Friend share my view that one of the greatbugbears for many small businesses has been the businessrate structure? The small businesses that I have talked toin the past 24 hours really welcomed the Chancellor’sproposed review of business rates.
Stephen Mosley: All of us, as Members of Parliament,
receive complaints about business rates from ourconstituents and those who run businesses. The cost ofbusiness rates comes straight off the bottom line of abusiness—straight out of profit and straight out of themoney that people take home at the end of the day—andit has a huge impact on businesses. That is especiallytrue in a constituency such as mine, where we have athriving and popular city centre with very high rentalvalues. The rateable values for small shops in the citycentre are quite extortionate. I welcome the announcementsabout the reform of business rates, the extension ofsmall business rate relief and the increase of the rebatefor small businesses from £1,000 to £1,500 in April.
As our economy grows and evolves, so do our small
businesses. Whereas small business used to mean thecorner shop on the high street, it can now mean artisanproducers on stalls at farmers markets, family-runrestaurants and bars, an international e-business run by
a student from his bedroom or a boutique clothesbusiness run from the kitchen table by a full-time mum.The fact that small business in the UK is booming isgreat news for Britain, great news for jobs and greatnews for wealth creation. Across the country, recordnumbers of people are starting their own small businesses,and British entrepreneurs created a record number of newbusinesses last year. Research from the national enterprisecampaign shows that more than 526,000 businesseswere created in 2013, which was up from 484,000 in2012 and 440,000 in 2011. We all want that trend tocontinue.
Maria Miller (Basingstoke) (Con): I congratulate my
hon. Friend on securing this important debate. Will hejoin me in applauding the increased number of womenwho are setting up small businesses and the growth infemale entrepreneurship in this country, which theGovernment have nurtured?
Stephen Mosley: Of course I will. Not only are women
setting up small businesses in record numbers, but youngpeople are doing the same. Chester university is runningsome fantastic courses to support entrepreneurs, whichget young people out there so that when they leaveuniversity they will consider the option of setting uptheir own business. Y oung people, women and ethnicminorities are all people whom we want to help to setup their own small business, and they are all doing so inrecord numbers.
The Government have done a huge amount to help.
As we saw in yesterday’s autumn statement, the Chancelloris willing to give even more support to small businesses.There is still a huge amount that local communities,local groups and local businesses can do to help themselves,because the people who most benefit from having successful,popular and thriving local shops are local communities.
Simon Wright (Norwich South) (LD): I congratulate
the hon. Gentleman on securing the debate. Does heagree that Government-backed opportunities to highlightsuccess, such as the great British high street awards, canplay a really important role? The Lanes in Norwich wasa well deserved winner of the city category of thoseawards for the vibrant reputation of its high street.
Stephen Mosley: Like many people in this room, I
spent a good deal of time in Norwich a few years agowhen there was a by-election in the north of the city,and I was amazed at what a beautiful city it was.Coming from the north-west of England, I had notbeen to Norwich before, but I was impressed. It is onmy wish list of places I would like to visit in the future.
Research shows that for every £1 that is spent in a
local independent business, 60p goes straight back intothe local economy. Areas that have a high proportion ofindependent small shops have been found to increasesocial interactions between shoppers. People in suchareas are twice as likely to say hello to other people ontheir high street. People who live near small shops are16% more likely to be positive about their local highstreet than are those who live in areas that lack independentstores.
Valerie Vaz (Walsall South) (Lab): I congratulate the
hon. Gentleman on securing the debate. Does he agreethat there are concerns about the number of empty193WH 194WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday[Valerie Vaz]
shops in our high streets? In Walsall town centre, at
least 26% of shops are empty. Do we not need to dosomething more for our small businesses in the high street?
Stephen Mosley: I totally agree. Shopping habits are
changing. People are moving online, and they areincreasingly using out-of-town shopping centres. We ascommunity leaders, local authorities and other organisationsmust get behind our high streets to ensure that whenpeople go shopping in their local high street, they arenot simply going to the shops but are having an experiencein which they learn something and enjoy themselves. Itis incumbent on all of us—Governments and localauthorities, but also businesses and local communities—tomake sure that high streets are vibrant, fun and excitingso that people decide to go to them. Only if people go toshopping centres and provide the necessary footfall willbusinesses move in and take up the empty shops.
Alok Sharma: My hon. Friend talked about support,
and of course we can all offer support, but there isGovernment support as well. I believe that the Governmenthave been relentless in their support for business, andwe all welcome that. The Government have all sorts ofschemes to help small businesses. What more does myhon. Friend think that we in the House, or the Government,can do to inform people of those schemes and of thesupport that is available to help them to prosper andgrow?
Stephen Mosley: My hon. Friend has got to the nub
of the debate. As well as highlighting small businessSaturday, the debate is about highlighting the supportthat is available for small businesses across the country.I will talk later in my speech about what the Governmentare doing. I am sure that the Minister is quite capable ofbanging the drum and telling us all about the goodwork that he and the Government have done to supportsmall businesses.
Mark Hunter (Cheadle) (LD): I congratulate my hon.
Friend on securing this important debate. He is beinggenerous with his time, and I hope that he gets theopportunity to proceed more quickly. I put it to himthat although small business Saturday is massivelyimportant and a very healthy thing—that is why we areall here to support it—we really need communitiesacross the length and breadth of the country to understandthe need to support their local shops all year round.Small business Saturday is a welcome initiative, but byitself it is not enough. Retailers on the high street face agreat deal of challenge, and we need to get more peopleto support local shops on a regular basis. Does my hon.Friend agree with me on that point? I hope that he willhave the opportunity to say what more we can alldo—not just the Government—collectively to supportour local small businesses.
Stephen Mosley: I support what the hon. Gentleman
says. He raises the points that I wanted to raise in myconclusion, so he is denying me all the glory of raisingthose issues myself.
By working together, local communities, local groups
and local businesses can boost their small shops andtherefore boost their local area. One of the most inspiring,exciting and successful ideas for doing that is small
business Saturday. Simply, small business Saturday existsto support, inspire and promote small businesses. Itstarted in the United States of America in 2010, and ithas been a key feature of the pre-Christmas shoppingperiod and become established on the first Saturdayafter Thanksgiving. Small business Saturday was conceived,launched and is still heavily backed by American Express,with the intention of encouraging shoppers to patronisesmall, local bricks-and-mortar businesses.
In America small business Saturday has been heavily
promoted via a nationwide radio and television advertisingcampaign, with a heavy focus on social media that hasgenerated more than 1 million Facebook likes andhundreds of thousands of tweets using the Twitterhashtags #SmallBusinessSaturday and #SmallBizSaturday.Many politicians and business groups in the US havebacked the campaign, with many launching campaignsin their local area. Last weekend, on small businessSaturday in the US, President Obama and his daughters,Malia and Sasha, went shopping at the Politics andProse bookstore in Washington DC, where they pickedup 17 books. Additionally, many small business ownersin the US have started to run marketing specials onsmall business Saturday to capitalise on the boost infoot and online traffic, as most customers at this time ofyear are actively shopping for the Christmas period.
Seema Malhotra (Feltham and Heston) (Lab/Co-op):
I congratulate the hon. Gentleman on securing thisdebate. My hon. Friend the Member for Streatham(Mr Umunna) played a key role in bringing smallbusiness Saturday to the UK. The hon. Member forCity of Chester (Stephen Mosley) is outlining a numberof areas where small businesses in America have comeforward, but does he agree that we can do a lot moreand use small business Saturday to help our local businessesgain the confidence to come forward, market themselvesmore and feel that they can be much more present, andproud of their presence, in our communities?
Stephen Mosley: I totally agree. Small business Saturday
started in the United States, and it is thought that lastyear US consumers spent $5.7 billion, which is about£3.6 billion, in small, independent retailers on smallbusiness Saturday. Following its success in the UnitedStates, small business Saturday first burst on to thescene in the UK in 2013. I am aware that the hon.Member for Streatham (Mr Umunna) was very muchinvolved in bringing small business Saturday over tothe UK.
Valerie Vaz: To make a link between the United
States and here, we were lucky to have the ReverendJesse Jackson holding up a sign for small businessSaturday with my hon. Friend the Member for Streatham(Mr Umunna) in Walsall.
Stephen Mosley: I know how much the hon. Member
for Streatham has been involved. He first learned aboutsmall business Saturday when he saw celebrities andhigh-profile people in the US tweeting about it. He,with Members from all parts of the House, put in ahuge amount of work to bring small business Saturdayto the UK last year. In the UK, small business Saturdayhas settled on the first Saturday in December, and it195WH 196WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturdayaims to have a long-term impact by encouraging shoppers
to shop local and support the small businesses in theirlocal area.
An independent community interest company, Small
is Big, has been set up to run small business Saturday inthe UK, and it endeavours to encourage organisationsto support small business Saturday and get the wordout about the day. Organisations such as the Federationof Small Businesses, the Association of Town & CityManagement, the Association of Convenience Storesand the Northern Ireland Independent Retail TradeAssociation have given their support have encouragedtheir memberships to get involved. Last year’s smallbusiness Saturday gained widespread support and publicityacross the UK in the newspapers, on TV and in socialmedia.
Surveys show that 48% of UK customers were aware
of last year’s small business Saturday and of the campaign’saim to encourage people to shop small and shop local.The small business Saturday UK Facebook page gainedmore than 1.5 million views, and #SmallBizSatUK wasin Twitter’s top three trending items all day. The campaigngained widespread support across the country, with40% of local authorities also supporting the day. It isestimated that more than £460 million was spent insmall businesses on that day alone, with 43% of shoppersdeciding specifically to shop at a local store, spending£33 each on average.
Last year, small business Saturday gained the support
of more than 200 Members of Parliament, includingthe Prime Minister and Members from both FrontBenches. I was one of those 200 MPs, and I used smallbusiness Saturday to try to boost our local small shopsand high streets in Chester. We distributed fliers andposters, and with the support of the local newspapers,we advertised both the day and special offers by manyof our local shops. More than 400 local shops tookpart, and I started my Christmas shopping in the wonderfulChester suburb of Hoole, which has a fantastic reputationas one of the premier local high streets in Chester and isfull of local, independent shops.
Running alongside small business Saturday, I was
delighted to organise and run our first small businessawards, which allowed customers to nominate and votefor their favourite independent shops and businesses. Itwas obvious that local people recognise the differencethat these businesses make, whether it be the greatcustomer service they receive or the high-quality productsthat the shops deliver. More than 150 businesses tookpart in the awards, and more than 1,000 local peoplevoted for their favourite business. G&M Goold funeraldirectors in Vicars Cross and Monogram dry cleanersin Newton were the joint winners of my awards last year.
This year’s small business Saturday looks likely to
beat all records. Like last year, we are seeing a hugepush on the internet and on social media. The websitewww.smallbusinesssaturdayuk.com contains loads ofuseful information and promotional materials, such asdigital packs of downloadable marketing material, includingposters, logos and social media icons. There is alsoadvice on running successful social media campaignsand a useful guide to avoiding the most common Twitterpitfalls—something some of our colleagues could dowell to read. The small business Saturday team is usingsocial media channels to feature 100 small businesses—onea day—in the 100 days leading up to small businessSaturday, highlighting all that is great about small businesses.Foodies, an Edinburgh cafe, bakery and caterer launched
with help from the Prince’s Trust, is today’s “small biz100” company.
Alongside the online campaign, the small business
Saturday bus is travelling the length and breadth of thecountry advertising small business Saturday and handingout promotional materials. There is also a big campaignin the traditional media, with many national and localnewspapers already getting behind small business Saturday,highlighting the importance of Britain’s small businessesand backing the “shop small, shop local” campaign.
Chester will again be playing its part in ensuring that
small business Saturday is a huge success. My office hasproduced small business packs containing posters andfliers, which we have distributed to small shops in thecity centre and in suburban shopping areas. We havelaunched this year’s competition to find Chester’s favouritesmall business and distributed thousands of nominationslips, as well as allowing people to nominate theirfavourite small businesses on my “Championing Chester”website. Chester has a strong reputation as home tomany successful small independent shops and I lookforward to seeing the nominations and joining thecelebration of our small business scene’s diversity andsuccess.
Small business Saturday is an excellent way of
highlighting the importance and success of small businessacross the UK, but the campaign, as we have heard, isabout more than encouraging people to use small,independent local shops on one day a year. It is alsoabout changing people’s mindsets so that they shoplocal and shop small every day of the year. Just asconsumers need to be there to support small business365 days a year, the Government also need to be there365 days a year.
So far, as we have heard in interventions, the Government
have an impressive record. I will briefly outline some ofthe welcome measures and support that have beenprovided to help small businesses thrive and grow. Theyinclude: the employment allowance, which has cut eachcompany’s national insurance Bill by £2,000, whichdirectly benefits smaller companies disproportionatelymore than large multinationals; the reduction in corporationtax rates; the doubling of small business rates relief, andthe welcome announcement from the Chancellor yesterdaythat that will continue after April next year. A £1,000business rates discount has also been introduced forretail premises with a rateable value up to £50,000,which the autumn statement yesterday increased to£1,500 from April next year.
Toby Perkins (Chesterfield) (Lab): We all know business
rates are a bugbear for many small businesses, particularlyin the high-street sector. What was his view on theGovernment’s decision back in 2012 to put off therevaluation of business rates? Does he think that thatwas a mistake, on reflection, or does he support theirdecision?
Stephen Mosley: I am delighted by the action that the
Government have taken, whether it is the introductionof small business rates relief, the rebate for small retailunits or, as we heard earlier, the decision announcedyesterday to review the business rates system. I hopethat the Opposition support the Government in achievingtheir aims.197WH 198WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business SaturdayToby Perkins: In terms of the business rates, I am not
clear what the Government’s aims are, other than havinga review. However, I was asking the hon. Gentlemanspecifically about the decision to put off the revaluationof business rates, which will have had a significantimpact on most northern communities, and probablyon his. I would be interested to hear his analysis andwhether he supported that measure.
Stephen Mosley: I was trying to keep the small business
Saturday debate non-political to show what supportexists across the House for small business in the UK,but if the shadow Minister wants to get political, Icould point out why this Government inherited massivespending problems in 2010. Huge mistakes were madeup to 2010. I do not want to go there; I want to keep thisdebate positive about what we can do to help smallbusiness going forwards. Is the hon. Gentleman happywith that?
Toby Perkins: I am happy to take that challenge,
although I do not know why the hon. Gentleman feelsquite so threatened. He was reading off a list of thingsthat the Government had done, and one of the mostsignificant decisions that they have taken over the pastfew years has been their decision on business rates. He istalking about business rates, so I asked whether hesupports that decision. He should not necessarily seethat as hostile; I am just asking him what his view is.
Stephen Mosley: I quite agree that the Government
have done a lot, whether on small business rates relief,the doubling of rates relief or the rebate. I totallysupport those actions, and I support the announcementyesterday of a future review of business rates.
The measures on business rates and corporation tax
allow small businesses to keep more of their hard-earnedcash—money they can use to take on more staff, investin new equipment, or simply pay down debt. To helpsmall businesses raise the cash that they need to start orgrow, the Government have also launched the BritishBusiness bank, providing up to £4 billion in funding forbusiness on top of the successful start-up loans scheme,which has already provided £150 million to enable morethan 20,000 entrepreneurs to follow their dreams andstart their own small companies. I am sure that theMinister will highlight many more of the schemes thathe and his Government have introduced to help smallbusiness in his response to the debate.
Since 2010, hundreds of thousands of new businesses
have been launched every year, so that, as we heard thePrime Minister say at questions yesterday, there arenow more than 760,000 more businesses in the UK. Inmy constituency of Chester, new business start-ups haveincreased by 300%. Small businesses have been responsiblefor nearly half the job creation in the UK. They employabout 15 million people and make up about half of ourprivate sector economy. Small business has an absolutelyfantastic story to tell, and small business Saturday isan opportunity for us all to shout from the rooftopsabout how important our small and local shops andbusinesses are.
Although the Government have done a lot to help, it
is also crucial that local communities, groups and businessescome together and celebrate all that is great about oursmall businesses and the contribution they make to oureconomy and our high streets, because the people whobenefit the most from having successful, popular and
thriving local shops are local communities themselves. Iwill be shopping small and local in Chester this Saturday,and I hope that the Minister and other Members willback small business Saturday too.
Mr Philip Hollobone (in the Chair): An excellent
example for us all.
1.55 pm
Mr William Bain (Glasgow North East) (Lab): It is a
pleasure to serve under your chairmanship, Mr Hollobone.I congratulate the hon. Member for City of Chester(Stephen Mosley) on securing this debate. I recall speakingin a similar debate last year, and I am pleased to reflecton the fact that we have had a welcome year of solidgrowth in small and medium-sized businesses sincethen, as well as a good deal of job creation. We shouldwelcome and encourage that. Later in my remarks, Ihope to set out some of the challenges that smallbusinesses in my constituency—and across the country,through the Select Committee on Business, Innovationand Skills—have mentioned to me and on which theyare seeking help from Government and all of us in politics.
There has been some discussion about the consistency
of policy among Governments of different complexions.Some 77% of all employment growth between 1998 and2010, when we were in government, was due to smalland medium-sized businesses. All of us in this Househave a huge commitment to recognising the economicand social contribution made by small businesses, andhopefully some good ideas will emerge from this debateabout how we can strengthen them further.
I think of the bakeries, coffee shops and newsagents
open long before we all get up in the morning, hard atwork providing services and making a terrific contributionto the economy, but I also want to single out some ofthe important small businesses that have surged in thelast few years in my constituency. One of them isGaia-Wind, a manufacturer of small wind turbines inPort Dundas, which has hugely expanded the number oflocal Glasgow people it employs over the past five years.The company has now cracked open access to marketsin Japan and Denmark, so its contribution in exports tothe Scottish economy will be much larger.
Speaking with Gaia-Wind threw up some issues that
many small businesses across the country still experience.The first is access to finance. According to the Bank ofEngland’s most recent inflation report, SME lending isstill falling. It has fallen every year during this Parliament,despite initiatives such as funding for lending. It illustratesthe need for powerful structural reform of our bankingsector and for a British investment bank that can providefinance to major infrastructure projects and strategicallyimportant industries in our economy. The green investmentbank needs more powers to drive an increase in greeninvestment that will benefit the entire economy and helpus show the global leadership that we should be showingin decarbonising our energy supply by 2030.
We can learn from other countries such as Germany,
which in both good periods of economic growth andperiods of downturn have been able to keep fundinggoing to small and medium-sized businesses in a waythat the traditional banking system in this country hasbeen unable to. I hope that in the next few years we willsee more action for more regional banks. That wouldhelp.199WH 200WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business SaturdaySeema Malhotra: My hon. Friend is making an
excellent speech. He rightly raises the issue of access tofinance and creative ways in which banks might nowstart to provide that access. Does he agree that theremight be more opportunity to think about how businessesare reached? When I was in India earlier this year, Imet the founder of the Mann Deshi bank, which usesmobile banking—a bit like our chip and pin system—togo out into communities and deliver services on thedoorstep. That makes a huge difference to people,particularly women, who are setting up theirbusinesses.
Mr Bain: My hon. Friend makes an excellent point.
Indeed, one of the trends that we have spotted in thelast few years is the number of women becomingincreasingly keen to start up their own businesses, whichpolicy in politics and the financial system should seekto promote. She made her point very well indeed.
There is a need for structural banking reform and for
the Government to emphasise more the role that oursmall and medium-sized businesses can play in terms ofexports. It was disappointing yesterday, after the autumnstatement, to read in the fiscal report by the Office forBudget Responsibility that it has had to downgrade itsforecast for the contribution that net trade will make togrowth in this country for each of the next five years.That is a desperate position and Members from allparts of the House should be concerned about it.
I urge the Government, following this debate, to take
more steps to make UK Trade & Investment muchmore proactive, to build on the work that our excellentexporting SMEs are doing in all our constituencies, andto ensure that the Government not only react to businessesbut proactively engage with them and open up newmarkets. That is what the small businesses in myconstituency tell me is needed, and it is an urgentpriority for the Government during the next year.
We have heard, quite rightly, tributes to my hon.
Friend the Member for Streatham (Mr Umunna)—smallbusiness Saturday in this country is his initiative.However, we should also follow some examples thatoriginated, in principle, in the United States. That wouldbe helped by having a small business administrationwithin the Department for Business, Innovation andSkills. When small businesses speak to me, too many ofthem say that they feel there is too much of a silomentality in Government, with too many Ministers indifferent Departments but not enough working togetherto produce the best approach—particularly when itcomes to our manufacturing exporters. I hope that asmall business administration within BIS would beginto break down that silo mentality, so that we would seeimprovements.
Small and medium-sized businesses deserve other
help from Government when it comes to procurement.This Government, I remember, came to office andpledged that a quarter of all Government procurementcontracts would go to SMEs. That simply has nothappened; that target has not been met. It is clear thatthe next Government, whichever complexion they have,will have to do substantially more to make up for theunderperformance of the Cabinet Office during the lastfour and a half years. An emphasis across Governmenton how the procurement system can help SMEs has gotto be a priority of Government policy.Small businesses also tell me about the problem they
face in gaining access to broadband. Again, the previousGovernment had a commitment for universal access tobroadband by 2012. This Government decided to scrapthat commitment; they made new commitments aboutsuperfast broadband, but in the last year or so thosehave been put back to 2017. With more and morepeople shopping online, even with local firms, it must bea priority of Government to ensure that as many peopleand as many small businesses are online as quickly aspossible. That involves both getting support from theDepartment for Business, Innovation and Skills anddealing with issues such as payroll, tax and benefits. Ifwe are to have an infrastructure in Britain that is fit forthe 21st century, it is an absolute priority that we seebusinesses online as quickly as possible and with agood, reliable broadband speed; small businesses alsoregularly complain about their broadband speed.
Another issue critical to small businesses is Government
policy on skills. Commenting after yesterday’s autumnstatement, the National Institute of Adult ContinuingEducation said that it was disappointed that the measuresin the statement did not tie up with rhetoric that we hadheard beforehand. NIACE particularly points to theissue about adult skills and workplace training. TheMinister and I have regularly conversed about it.
Given the OBR’s verdict on productivity and investment,
it is absolutely critical for the future of small businessesthat they have a willing partner in Government toensure that investment in a skilled work force is apriority and is improved in the coming years. TheFederation of Small Businesses, among others, is veryconcerned about this issue.
It has also become clear this week that there are still
very disappointing numbers on earnings growth, andthat is borne out by our experience as constituency MPsevery weekend. If we consider the information thatcame out from the Office for National Statistics thisweek about the annual survey of hours and wages, wesee that wage growth in SMEs is becoming a particularproblem. The number of workers across Scotland andthe rest of the UK being paid less than a living wage hasrisen this year compared with last. That makes the casefor having a more proactive approach from Government,to support small businesses that want to pay the livingwage and that will see the benefits coming from theGovernment’s taking more action on it.
I simply commend the idea of having a fiscal incentive.
Labour Members have sought to put that incentivetogether in the form of “make work pay” contracts. TheGovernment ought to be looking at that type of incentiveas well, so that we can go ahead on a cross-party basis,as the hon. Member for City of Chester has asked us to.Such an incentive would do a great deal to help businessesfeeling pressure from lack of access to finance to be ableto benefit from the living wage, where that is affordable,as well as helping the workers who do such great workfor those businesses.
I am optimistic about the future of our small businesses.
They have a huge amount to provide, not only for ourdomestic growth but for the export-led growth that allof us, from all parts of the House, want. However, weneed a more active Government who take action onskills, finance, procurement and investment, and I hopethat that will be one of the consequences that followsfrom this excellent debate this afternoon.201WH 202WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturday2.8 pm
Andrew Bingham (High Peak) (Con): Thank you,
Mr Hollobone, for calling me to speak. It is a pleasureto serve under your chairmanship again.
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for City
of Chester (Stephen Mosley) on securing this importantdebate. As a former small business man myself, I knowand appreciate the value of small businesses, both toour local economies in our own constituencies and tothe national economic recovery. Every debate in WestminsterHall is important, but this one has an extra level ofimportance, and coming today—just two days beforesmall business Saturday—it could not be better timed.
People wonder what the definition of a small business
is. Companies employing fewer than 50 people often fallinto the category of “small business”, and I supposethat if we compare that number with some of the largerconglomerates in the country, that is a fair description.However, I will focus on what are, in my view, the smallbusinesses—the really small businesses, or the micro-businesses.
I ran a micro-business for 20-odd years and I can
assure Members that running one is not easy. Employingonly a handful of people, as I did, I used to have to dealwith customers of all different sizes and types. I wassalesman, credit controller, debt control, buyer andhuman resources manager all at once, and many smallbusiness operators are in the same boat. To do all thoseroles, they have to work late into the night, putting inmany hours. They take their work home and they live,eat and breathe their business.
In High Peak there are 3,520 businesses and 98.5% of
those have fewer than 50 employees. It is all too oftentoo easy to forget them because of their size. One smallbusiness man said to me, “I don’t have time to lobby myMember of Parliament or to go to meetings. I’m toobusy trying to earn a living.” It is up to us as MPs to goto them, to tell them that we support them and want tohelp them.
As politicians, we would always seek to claim the
glory of any economic recovery and, yes, we play asignificant part, because we can legislate to help andsupport these businesses. I am proud that this Governmentare on the side of the small businesses. We do not regard“profit” as a dirty word and we want to help them intoprofit, because they can reinvest that and create morejobs and employment in our constituencies. Any economicrecovery is driven by businesses, including small businesses.The figure that I cited—the 98.5% in my constituency—shows that small and micro-businesses are very much atthe forefront of that effort and the recovery that we seetoday.
There is a perception among some that the typical
small business owner sits there with an expensive cigar,counting the money, but I assure hon. Members fromall parties that that is not so. They have staff to lookafter, debts to service and overheads to worry aboutand, above all, they have customers whom they have toservice and please.
Often a small business’s strongest asset is its staff.
Although there were never many of us, my staff werethe most important: they were the ones who spoke tocustomers. The staff in a business operating in a specialistfield are trained in a certain specialism, making themeven more important. A customer once said that he didnot have one mortgage on his house, but had 25 mortgages
to service, because his 25 employees relied on him fortheir income and the ability to pay their bills.
The small business has no human resources or personnel
departments and no credit control. The owner has tojuggle all the different roles and responsibilities, toprovide jobs for people, generate profits and pay his orher taxes. I hesitate to say it—and many hon. Membersin the Chamber from all parties have worked in smallbusinesses—but unless people have been in the situation,it is difficult to understand and comprehend it.
I remember many experiences well. I remember the
day when my two best customers went into liquidation.Anybody who has been in a small business may knowthat liquidation letters usually arrive on a Monday.Looking at the letter from a firm of solicitors, peoplewill think, “Oh dear, what’s this?”, and open it up tofind that XYZ Ltd is in liquidation. The first thing todo is see how much is owed, although we all know finewell that we will not get the money back from thatlimited company.
I remember being faced with the fact that I had lost a
significant sum—not only that, but I had lost my twobest customers. Such a situation leads to cash-flowproblems and affects the ability to earn that moneyback. It was not the greatest day and it will live with mefor a long time. That is why I say that we should payparticular attention to the experiences of people whohave to run these businesses and face such challengesdaily.
We should remember that all big businesses usually
start as small businesses. My company used to sell aircompressor machinery. I am not sure whether manyhon. Members know what an air compressor is. I couldtell them in great length if they wanted and, since wehave plenty of time this afternoon, we could have agreat lecture on air compressors.
I remember well a company coming to see me that
wanted a machine that cost £400 plus V AT. It was juststarting up and did not have the money and said that itcould just about squeeze £200. I did a deal with themand it paid half up front and the rest on a post-datedcheque. That company, which makes ready meals, nowemploys 270 people—it might even be in the constituencyof my hon. Friend the Member for Cheadle (MarkHunter). That company dealt with us for many years,because we had a bond of loyalty, and I was alwaysgrateful to it for that reason. Credit is due to it forgrowing into a large company. We should remembersuch examples and never forget small businesses. Smallbusiness Saturday is so important, because it gives us achance to support them.
Pretty much every shop on every high street is a small
business: every pub is a small business, for example. Aswell as the retail outlets that we have heard about, weshould remember and support plumbers, joiners andelectricians—all small businesses in their own right thatpeople can support on small business Saturday. However,I make a plea on behalf of the small and micro-businessesto all residents in my High Peak constituency, andothers: do not make small business Saturday an exceptionalday in your year’s shopping. People who use a smallbusiness should make every day a small business day,not just one day a year—with the greatest respect, thatis not much use to people who run small businesses.They cannot make a year’s profit and turnover in a day,so make it every day.203WH 204WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business SaturdayAs well as retail and public-facing small businesses,
there are trade businesses. I did very little business withthe general public; I was doing business with othercompanies. I make a plea to the Minister on behalf ofsuch businesses. Big companies, multinationals andespecially the public sector, whether councils, Governmentagencies or Departments, should all embrace this smallbusiness ethos and small business Saturday, as I havesaid before in the House. I venture that such organisationsmay not work on Saturdays, so they should think ofother days and embrace the concept of dealing withsmall businesses.
I have said it before and I say it again: take the lead,
give the small businesses and the micro-businesses achance to supply Government agencies and local councils,because they can often provide a better product at abetter price. Do not put ridiculous surveys, questionnairesand assessments, and all that sort of thing, in their way.Look at their products, what they can offer and theirprices. Do not have the same revolving merry-go-roundof big organisations dealing with big organisations. Letthe small company feed at the table as well. As I havesaid before, public sector companies would do better touse small businesses wherever they can, because theywould get a more personalised service and a betterproduct at a cheaper price.
I am sorry if I am getting a bit evangelical about this,
Mr Hollobone, but, as I said, I spent many years tryingto deal with big organisations and local authorities,knowing that I could do them a better deal. I rememberdealing with a local authority, knowing full well that myproduct was the same and my service was better, but Idid not have certain bits of paper with certain ticks onthem. I was facing somebody with an agenda to get allthe forms ticked and filled in and knew that I was notgoing to get the work. It was work that I wanted to getand I knew that I could provide a service at a better rate.Unfortunately, the taxpayer was being short-changed,because those organisations were paying a higher pricefor the product.
I applaud small business Saturday, but let every day
be a small business day. The big businesses—theconglomerates—can shout up for themselves; they havepeople on their payroll who can do that for them. I amhere to shout up for the small business man andwoman—incredibly hard-working small business ownersin the High Peak and across the country who do somuch and create so much for my constituents, yet theyare forgotten, overlooked and not recognised for theirefforts. My message to them is and always has beenclear. I will support them and I am proud that theGovernment support them. As we near Christmas, Isalute every one of them for the sleepless nights, thehard work and the graft that they put in to help oureconomy. I salute them for what they have contributedover this last year.
While I am on my feet, I have to be honest and say
that I am not a big lover of the Christmas festivities—[H
ON.
MEMBERS : “Bah, humbug!”] Yes—bah, humbug! Absolutely.
Lent is more my ethos. Anyway, while I am on thattheme, I wish small business owners a very merry Christmasand, more importantly, a prosperous Christmas andnew year.
Mr Philip Hollobone (in the Chair): It is perfectly in
order to be evangelical.2.17 pm
Andy McDonald (Middlesbrough) (Lab): It is a pleasure
to follow a wonderful speech by the hon. Member forHigh Peak (Andrew Bingham). I congratulate the hon.Member for City of Chester (Stephen Mosley) on securingthe debate. He spoke well, and I am sure that the city ofChester will be a thriving, vibrant place on Saturdayand that he will enjoy it, as we all will.
Hon. Members have made the point that there is a
wealth of experience in the House. A number of uscome from business backgrounds, from all sorts ofdisciplines, and I recognise the endeavour and energyand the hours that people put in, which the hon.Member for High Peak extolled. Having run smallbusinesses myself—a computer software house and asolicitor’s practice—I know exactly what he means.People not only work all hours, but they are often thelast to be paid. Those stresses should never, ever beunderestimated.
It is right that every day should be small business day.
However, the whole point of small business Saturday isto draw attention to the need for us to support our localbusinesses. This is the one day that we can really shine alight on them and, hopefully, it will establish practicesand shopping behaviours.
I am looking forward to Saturday. If last year’s was
anything to go by, we have a lot to look forward to. Lastyear in Middlesbrough I met dozens of businesses overtwo days: we claimed Friday as well, making it a two-daycelebration of the brilliance and endeavour of so manysmall businesses. There are some 4,000 small businessesin the borough of Middlesbrough. I apologise if Itrespass on to the territory of my hon. Friend theMember for Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland(Tom Blenkinsop), but I will talk about the entireborough. Debates such as this bring home the totalprivilege it is not only to represent and speak up forsuch terrific people, but to go around my constituencyand see at close quarters what brilliance and drive wehave in our communities. I am sure that that is the casefor all Members and their constituencies.
This debate is a cross-party celebration of small
businesses, but I hope that Government Memberswill not mind too much if I mark out for someattention the shadow Secretary of State for Business,Innovation and Skills for coming up with the idea ofbringing small business Saturday from America acrossthe pond to the UK. That mood of genuine cross-partycelebration was captured well by the hon. Member forCity of Chester.
Last year, I took the opportunity to visit small businesses
in the shopping centres and in the town centre, and itwas incredibly uplifting and revealing. The range ofbusinesses was remarkable, and it was wonderful tospeak to so many entrepreneurs who took to theirtrades and crafts with such enthusiasm, from a one-manleaded window manufacturer with an overflowing orderbook, to some brilliant young people with a thrivingbusiness digitising outdated film formats, to some terrificcatering businesses in the superb Baker Street Kitchenand the Olde Y oung Tea House, which was so busy thatwe could not get a seat. I am delighted to say that thelatter business has been such a roaring success in theintervening 12 months that it has had to move intobigger premises.205WH 206WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturday[Andy McDonald]
I also had the opportunity to call in at the magnificent
Psyche clothing store on Linthorpe road. I was delightedlast week to attend a sparkling event at the store tohonour its founder Steve Cochrane, who rightly receiveda special award from the mayor for his endeavour andhis massive contribution to our town. Steve epitomisesthe energy and drive of entrepreneurs in Middlesbrough.He started off extremely small some decades ago, with asmall shop selling an eclectic mix of bespoke clothing.He moved into bigger premises some 10 years ago, andthen moved into the former Uptons department store.That was a ridiculously ambitious project, but it hasbeen an overwhelming success, and it is so much morethan a fashion store; as the mayor himself said, it is awork of art in its own right. People come from far andwide to enjoy the fabulous fashions in a wonderfulenvironment. Since opening and establishing such apresence, that business has attracted other fashion retailersand idiosyncratic bars and eateries into the vicinity,creating a terrific buzz on Linthorpe road.
What really impressed me when I visited Baker street
was that it has real cachet and is full of stylish anddistinctive fashion outlets. There is a real Carnaby streetfeel about the place. Again, unique businesses haveattracted others, including two very successful micro-pubs.There is Sherlocks for one and the Twisted Lip foranother one—or even two. I should also mention thelong-standing family businesses that are synonymouswith our local town stories. They are part of our localhistories and narratives. An example in my constituencyis the magnificent, family-run, three generations old HSInteriors on North Ormesby road. The same can besaid of W .H. Watts on Parliament road, which has beenselling prams and buggies to generations of Middlesbroughfamilies. There are so many businesses like that, includingthe famous Jack Hatfield Sports.
Mark Hunter: I am enjoying listening to the name-
checking of so many different businesses in the hon.Gentleman’s constituency. He paints an encouragingpicture of progress. Does he agree that one thing weshould do on such occasions as this is pay particulartribute to small shops and businesses that go the extramile? As he was talking, I was thinking of all the smallbusinesses in my patch that come together to organiseevents of their own. That is not just Christmas fairs orswitching on the Christmas lights but events throughoutthe year. Usually it is the traders themselves who showentrepreneurship and initiative to get together to try tomake the shopping centre, the village high street orwhatever it is more attractive. They are the people whodeserve to succeed, because the days when shopkeeperscould sit back and wait for people to come to them are athing of the past. I invite him to pay tribute to all thosewho go that extra mile and put on those events for thebenefit of the wider community and not just for themselves.
Andy McDonald: I would be delighted to accept that
invitation. I pay tribute to those people, because we seeit in our communities—parades of shops where peoplego the extra mile, like the small greengrocer who decides,“I will do some bespoke delivery services. I will ensurethat the entire parade of shops can market itself and getmaterials out to people.” We see good instances ofpeople’s innovative drive. Those people are absolutelyvital to our communities. If they disappeared from our
sub-regional shopping centres, we would be all thepoorer for it. I pay tribute to them, because they arethe lifeblood of our communities. Their businesses arethe ones that define our local economies. The bigmultinational stores bring much to our high streets andshopping centres, but it is the smaller local businessesthat mean so much to our communities. As the hon.Member for City of Chester pointed out, for eachpound spent in small businesses, the vast majority ofthat pound—some 60p—circulates in the local economy.That should always be borne in mind.
What was self-evident last year was the huge number
of young women who had started their own businesses,especially in the fashion street I mentioned, but in otherplaces as well. I am delighted that my friend and colleagueLouise Baldock, the prospective parliamentary candidatefor Stockton South, will be with the Stockton businesswomen’s forum providing encouragement, support andopportunities to local female entrepreneurs and businessleaders. She has her own marketing consultancy offeringservices to a variety of businesses, and I look forward towelcoming her into the House in 2015, where I am sureher experience and expertise in business will make asignificant contribution.
Without any shadow of a doubt, we want to praise
our local small businesses, but we should also focus onthe need to create the conditions that enable businessesto flourish. I want to mention the work of Middlesbroughcouncil, which has invested in the regeneration of aredundant building in the heart of the town centre thatwas riddled with asbestos. It has also underwritten aproject to create a new hotel with 138 bedrooms. Thebeauty of that project is that it will bring people to thetown and encourage and stimulate business activity inits immediate vicinity. Those sorts of projects and initiativescannot be ignored, and I pay tribute to the council.
Tom Blenkinsop (Middlesbrough South and East
Cleveland) (Lab): My hon. Friend is pointing out thegood facts about Middlesbrough town centre and hisconstituency. In south Middlesbrough, we are equallyreliant on the town centre being strong and providingemployment. The civic pride that those small businessesprovide and reflect in a town or area is equal in thesmaller shopping precincts outside—in Hemlington,Marton, Coulby Newham, East Cleveland andGuisborough and places like that. The civic pride comesfrom those small businesses not only providing profitfor themselves, but having pride in their local area andhelping to maintain it. I pay tribute to Middlesbroughcouncil for its free parking scheme, which it has beenrunning for some time to provide small businesses withextra support, encouragement and footfall.
Andy McDonald: I entirely endorse what my hon.
Friend says. That local initiative was important, becausewe all face the challenges of out-of-town shoppingcentres. We want to ensure that people have an equalopportunity to come into town centres to shop. He isabsolutely right when he talks about the sense of placeand identity and people supporting their sub-regionalcentres, which is vital.
In conclusion, I put on record my enthusiasm for
small business Saturday. We got off to a good start lastyear, when the event added some £500 million of trading207WH 208WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturdayto GDP in 24 hours. I strongly suspect that with the
momentum and capacity that has built up over the past12 months, this year will be even better. I welcome theinitiative and congratulate the hon. Member for City ofChester on securing the debate.
Mr Philip Hollobone (in the Chair): We will now go to
a right hon. Lady in striking blue, who will be followedby an hon. Lady in striking red. I call Maria Miller.
2.29 pm
Maria Miller (Basingstoke) (Con): It is a great pleasure
to serve under your chairmanship, I think for the firsttime, Mr Hollobone, in this important debate. I congratulatemy hon. Friend the Member for City of Chester (StephenMosley) on securing the debate. I had the great pleasureof visiting Chester with him recently, so I know howwonderful that city is and about the important investmentthat is going into the city centre.
I pay tribute to my local branch of the Federation of
Small Businesses, in particular Tim Colman, the regionalvice-chairman, who does an extraordinary amount tosupport local businesses in my area. In the work that hedoes, he goes above and beyond the call of duty.
My hon. Friend the Member for High Peak (Andrew
Bingham) spoke about his experience as a small businessman. His comments resonated with me because myfather was a small business man, so I recognise exactlythe challenges he described. Running a small business isa tough job, especially for those with families. Weshould all pay tribute to the people who take thatrisk—who put themselves out there and run businessesto generate income not only for their own family, butfor other people as well.
Andrew Bingham: Like my right hon. Friend’s father,
my late father set up his business at the age of 27. Thewhole family were part of that business, because dad setit up and we lived and fell by his efforts. We were borninto that as we came through as the next generation.
Maria Miller: My hon. Friend is absolutely right that
it is in the blood, and we can see that in him.
Small business Saturday gives us all an opportunity
to think about and celebrate small businesses not onlynationally, but in our own communities. It is importantthat people shop locally. Residents of Basingstoke cando that every day of the week, but they have an extraopportunity to do so next week, because on Friday theHampshire farmers market, one of the largest in thecountry, will be in Basingstoke, showing that the ingenuityand entrepreneurial spirit is very much alive and kickingin my part of the world. I encourage everyone to goalong and see the entrepreneurial spirit of Hampshireshowcased there.
As I said, people in Basingstoke can shop locally
every day of the week and our local council has played agreat role in that achievement. The Viables Craft Centreon Harrow way is home to a number of small, localbusinesses, which have had the opportunity to cometogether to create the right environment for their products.They include the Butterfly Tree florists and Les JoliesChoses, which was set up by Lisa Wyatt—I know herwell—who, starting from just an idea, set up a businessthat is now thriving. That is the epitome of what onethinks about when one celebrates small businesses.Of course in Basingstoke we also have the top of
town shopping area, our historic area, which manyoverlook. It is the site of our 900-year-old market andthe Basingstoke assembly rooms, made famous by JaneAusten because they provided much of the material sheused in books such as “Mansfield Park.” Wheneverhon. Members think about shopping in Basingstoke, Iurge them to think about its history as well as itsmodernity.
I mentioned the importance of local authorities in
building small businesses and nowhere can that be moretrue than in Basingstoke. In the past year, we have seenmore than 1,000 new businesses formed in Basingstoke—indeed, we have more than 6,800 small businesses, whichaccount for 98% of the businesses in the borough. Theygrew by 6% in the past year and they are forecast togrow by a similar amount in the next 12 months.
Small businesses are the lifeblood of our economy
and they have been nurtured by our local authoritythrough a variety of measures. Our local council has aprocurement strategy that helps to support local smallbusinesses, so that they can tender more effectively forcontracts—a really positive action that can make anenormous difference—and we have a small businessconcordat, which helps that come into play. The localcouncil has also invested in small businesses. In particular,it has ensured that our top of town is small business-friendly.We have a shop-front grant scheme to help improve theappearance of the shops in the top of town, with up to£5,000 made available through the council, and we arecontinuing to develop that area as a centre of retailactivity in the town. In particular, I thank CouncillorTerri Reid, who spearheaded that initiative. I know thatlocal retailers are also grateful. I think it is the teamworkand partnership between our local small businesses, thelocal council and parliamentarians that makes thatwork as well as it can.
We like to celebrate small business success in Basingstoke.
We have the Inspire business awards, now the largestbusiness awards in Hampshire. This year we celebratedsmall business of the year winner the Basingstoke EnergyServices Co-operative, a fantastic organisation that Iknow well. An outstanding example of a co-operativerun on sustainable values, it is a deserving winner of theInspire award. This Saturday, I, like many other righthon. and hon. Members, will be going along to joinsmall businesses in our market square to celebrate smallbusiness Saturday.
I would like to take a couple of minutes to comment
on some of the announcements made by my righthon. Friend the Chancellor yesterday that will be ofparticular benefit to businesses in my constituencyand indeed every constituency, such as the fuel dutyfreeze and the structural review of business rates, aswell as the road improvements announced earlier thisyear. In my constituency, the improvements to the M3in the Winchester and Fleet areas as well as the BlackDam roundabout improvements funded by the Governmentwill make a huge difference to local businesses’ ability toget in and out of the town, improving their ability totrade effectively.
The abolition of employers’ national insurance
contributions for those taking on apprentices is also apositive measure for small businesses, which are takinga real risk when they take on extra staff. The more theGovernment can do to mitigate that risk, the more209WH 210WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturday[Maria Miller]
likely small businesses are to take on extra staff, so I
particularly wanted to put on record my thanks to theChancellor for that measure.
There are a number of other measures that I could
talk about, but it is important that the House notes thepositive way in which the Chancellor’s autumn statementwas received by businesses in Hampshire. The Hampshirechamber of commerce said that the Chancellor’s statementwill help to create jobs and stimulate economic activity.The Federation of Small Businesses in Hampshire hasspecifically welcomed the extension to the funding forlending scheme, which will help to provide cash forsmall businesses. Access to finance can be the differencebetween a business succeeding and it not succeeding, soit is that sort of insightful announcement that has doneso much to generate such a positive reception frombusinesses in Basingstoke and throughout Hampshire.
If we are to make sure that our economy is the
success that we need it be, we must look to the future. Ihave three questions for the Minister about how weensure the health of businesses, and small businesses inparticular, in the future. In Basingstoke, we are incrediblyfortunate to have been nominated by Surrey universityto be a hub for the development of 5G technologies,translating 5G research and development into businessesof the future. We will be working with Surrey university’sinnovation centre and a consortium of Huawei, Samsung,Fujitsu and many others to ensure that that incredibleresearch is grown into British businesses. That is anexciting opportunity for my community and somethingthat we are well placed to do, because of the incredibleskills that we have in our local work force.
My question for the Minister is: is he satisfied by the
progress being made in connectivity for small businesses?If we are to exploit not only 4G but 5G technologies totheir utmost, we need to make sure that small businesseshave the sort of connectivity that enables them to dothat. In bygone years, connectivity was all abouttransport—trains, roads and aeroplanes. Those remainimportant, but into the millennium and the next centurywe will need to ensure that broadband connectivity is atthe heart of that as well.
My second question for the Minister is about the role
of small business in getting more people into work. Iam particularly interested in the fact that under thisGovernment we now have record numbers of women inemployment, which should be applauded. There hasbeen a global rise in the number of female entrepreneurs,and the gap between the number of women and of menentrepreneurs is closing. Interestingly, the Harvard Business
Review recently produced a report stating that 37% of
enterprises globally are run by women; 126 millionwomen are running businesses around the world. DowJones research has shown that venture-backed companiesfound to be successful had twice the number of womeninvolved in forming them. Women have a critical role toplay in successful businesses. The Government havealready done a huge amount to support women intoemployment, but what else is the Minister planning tomake sure that women play a full role in the economicsuccess of this country?
On the back of that, for me, social enterprises are a
hugely important part of the ability of this country toform new and small businesses. I pay tribute to SueDovey, the chief executive of Action Hampshire, who
runs the School for Social Entrepreneurs in Hampshire.We have numerous success stories coming through thatorganisation of women setting up businesses and socialenterprises that are hugely successful and beneficial toour community. In particular, I pay tribute to the workof Catherine Waters-Clark, who set up Inspero, a socialenterprise giving young people the opportunity to growvegetables and their own food and then to learn how tocook it. What a wonderful example of how socialenterprise can start up a small business that is incrediblyimportant and useful to our local community. My questionto the Minister is, what more will he do to supportsocial enterprises, which are a fantastic opportunity forwomen and men to get into employment or set up theirown businesses?
Last but by no means least, there is the important
role of enterprise in the lives of young people in thiscountry. In Hampshire, we have an active Y oung Enterpriseorganisation. Y oung Enterprise is the largest businessand education charity in the UK, supporting 250,000young people to learn about business, and it is active inmy constituency. One of the most important things thatwe can do during a child’s education is to teach themabout enterprise and the opportunities of entrepreneurship.I will be interested in the Minister’s comments.
Small business is the foundation of British business.
The Government’s long-term economic plan providesthe right conditions for small businesses. What we haveto do is unlock the entrepreneur in all of us, so that wecan see our economy thrive and do as well as we need itto in the future. I look forward to the Minister’s responsesto my questions.
2.44 pm
Seema Malhotra (Feltham and Heston) (Lab/Co-op):
It is a pleasure to serve under your chairmanship,Mr Hollobone, and to make a contribution to thisimportant debate marking our national small businessSaturday this weekend. I again congratulate the hon.Member for City of Chester (Stephen Mosley) on securingthe debate. I also thank my hon. Friend the Member forStreatham (Mr Umunna), who helped to build thecoalition of support to bring small business Saturday tothe UK last year.
I grew up in my parents’ small shop in Hounslow. It
was very much a community shop and in many ways itwas there that I learned the value of feeling part of andserving in a community. Through that experience, Igained a love for small businesses and an appreciationof the role that they play. Growing up in a shop is adifferent kind of family lifestyle—although it is a commonexperience for many in my constituency, as I am sure itis for many in other constituencies. The lifestyle isdifferent because it can sometimes be much harder toseparate work and home. The shop or business can be apassion for those who are running it, and it becomespart of the whole family life.
Such a life is also a great challenge, with many small
business owners sometimes having a day-to-day struggleto make ends meet. They need all the skills—whetherbeing the strategist, the marketing expert, the onewho sorts out technology, the accountant or thefinancial manager. I recall many instances of my fatherbeing up late at night dealing with the accounts afterputting the kids to bed. When we think about and211WH 212WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturdaythank small businesses and their contribution, it is
important to recognise the daily challenges faced bymany of them.
Many small business owners have also faced such
challenges as part of the cost-of-living crisis that wehave experienced. I have met many running businessesin my constituency who were struggling to make endsmeet. They talked about problems with banks andabout taking out extra loans to get through tough times.They welcomed Labour’s commitment to freeze energybills, because that would save not only families butsmall businesses significant costs of up to £5,000 a year.
Another important point about small businesses that
has already been made is their social contribution.Small businesses make our communities feel so muchsafer and more friendly. They can make a difference bybeing open slightly later; when they shut early, localstreets can feel deserted and far less safe.
I hope that this weekend we will see many more
residents and visitors shopping in local businesses—notonly celebrating their success, but helping them withtheir revenues and growth and making them feel muchmore valued as real actors and players in our community.It is an excellent fact that 43% of consumers who knewabout small business Saturday last year said that theyspent more on the day, which contributed to some£500 million in trade. I hope to see that figure exceededthis year. I am certainly looking forward to starting myChristmas shopping in Feltham and Heston in oursmall businesses.
Small business Saturday is also a chance to celebrate
how local businesses can contribute on the nationalstage. One business in my constituency, Kool Cakes,was founded by Kulwinder Paul Kumar. He was one ofthe official cake makers for Her Majesty’s diamondjubilee and he made Frankie’s cake in the 2012 “BigBrother”. It is quite something to go into his small shopin Heston, where I often stop for tea and a slice ofeggless cake, and to see pictures of such things on thewall and to think, “Actually, this is a local business.”Such people are heroes—national ones as well as localones.
Many hon. Members have referred to women who
run businesses. Last year on small business Saturday, Istopped for a cup of tea at Charlie’s Café in Feltham,which is run by Carol Chownsmith. She is anotherexample of somebody who comes forward because theywant to do something that is a passion of theirs andthat will make a contribution to their community—aplace where local people can come to meet, eat andshare their lives. This weekend, I will also visit HestonFlorist, which I know is doing some excellent specialoffers for Christmas—Christmas is, of course, at theforefront of many people’s minds.
I say all this because it is important to think about the
character of our businesses. They serve the needs ofmembers of the local community. It is important tohave access to such vibrancy and to a range of businesses;it is so much more attractive than going into a supermarket,where the level of service is not nearly as personal.
I will touch on a few other matters. The first has
already been raised by several hon. Members: theimportance of creating an infrastructure of supportand the important role of local authorities, chambers ofcommerce and others in helping to achieve that. InHounslow, we have West London Business and the
Hounslow chamber of commerce, which do a lot ofwork to help to network businesses and encouragetraining programmes.
Hounslow council also encourages the setting up of
small businesses, and has made a big difference duringthe past year by introducing a free half hour of parking—something that many local traders had called for. I haveseen the contribution that has made in my inbox, as Inow have fewer complaints about the cost of being ableto have access to trade on our doorstep. Parking costshad been stopping impromptu trade, so the free parkinghas made a big difference for traders in my constituency.
Alongside some of the positives, businesses have also
raised some challenges with me. For example, they areoften on the receiving end of antisocial behaviour. Also,if local authorities do not clear waste quickly enoughfrom in front of their shops, that can be unsightly. Smallbusiness owners spend hours and hours in their place ofwork—they do not leave and come home—so that placeis important to their well-being. I have been workingwith local police on tackling antisocial behaviour andthe small crime that affects local shops. That kind ofwork is incredibly important and we must focus on it atthe national level as well. It does not just help shopkeepersand small business owners to feel safe; it is better for theworkers in those stores and creates a safe environmentfor consumers so that they can shop in and supportlocal businesses, whether in the morning, afternoon orevening.
Toby Perkins: I am enjoying my hon. Friend’s
contribution immensely. She focused on the importantrole for local authorities in supporting small businessesand on the connection between many different aspectsof public services and the success of small businesses. Isshe concerned about the autumn statement, in which weheard that there will be absolutely unprecedented cutsin public spending—much of which I suspect will fallon local authorities? We cannot sit in this place and say,“This is what we are doing for local authorities,” andthen close our eyes to the impact of local authority cutson the capacity of councils to support small businessesin their areas.
Seema Malhotra: My hon. Friend makes an important
point. I worry about the extent of the cuts and thedamage that they will do. We absolutely need to respondto those cuts and listen to our businesses and localcouncils in the debate about them. Reform is alsoimportant. We have seen some innovations such as thesharing of work between local authorities and the police,as has happened in Hounslow, with them working together,co-locating and sharing budgets. That will make a hugedifference.
Another issue is skills and relationships with local
schools. There are some excellent examples—from abroadas well as from this country—of young people in schoolsgetting access to work experience. That gives access tothe world of work and an understanding, throughexperience, of its opportunities and satisfaction; it alsoallows young people to experience some of the challengesof running an enterprise.
Will the Minister tell us to what extent building links
between local businesses and schools is part of a programmefor work experience development, including for under-16-year-olds in schools? To what extent is that embedded213WH 214WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturday[Seema Malhotra]
in strategies for local enterprise partnerships and other
parts of our economic infrastructure? Support for smallbusinesses on skills and on the ways in which theyconnect to their communities should be part of a coherentnational strategy—it should not just be subject to whata local authority does.
I will close by saying that it is important that we
should have had this debate and shared some perspectivesfrom small businesses in our constituencies. As politicians,we must stay live to the reality. Small businesses are thebackbone of our economy, and the giants of the futureoften start small. Supporting businesses when they startup so that they can grow is an incredibly importantchallenge and one on which we must maintain a nationalfocus.
Mr Philip Hollobone (in the Chair): If the Front
Benchers wish to split the remaining time betweenthem, they will have 45 minutes each, but it is notcompulsory for them to do so.
2.56 pm
Toby Perkins (Chesterfield) (Lab): Thank you for
that advice, Mr Hollobone. I will take both parts of itseriously. It is a pleasure to serve under your chairmanship,for what I believe is the first time.
I congratulate the hon. Member for City of Chester
(Stephen Mosley) on securing what has been an excellentand timely debate about small business Saturday. Thedebate has ranged over a variety of issues, but has hadat its heart a recognition of the exciting opportunity theday brings. For Members across the House to have achance to speak about the importance of small businessesand of small business Saturday just two days before theevent is very welcome.
[J
IMSHERIDAN in the Chair ]
Today the small business Saturday bus tour reaches
its conclusion, as it visits Camden. Last year, memorably,it drove up Downing street and was given a prominentand welcome salute. Whether moving from Westminsterto Camden is going up in the world or down is a matterof opinion—I will let individual Members make uptheir own mind on that—but the tour has been verysuccessful, going out into communities to let businessesknow what they can do to promote the day, and ensuringthat people know it is happening and that they have anopportunity to support it.
Many hon. Members have been on the bus when it
has visited their constituency. It has made 14 visits overthe past three weeks. I was there for the tour’s launch inLeeds on 17 November, and very impressive it was, too.I was delighted when on 24 November it came toChesterfield and I had the opportunity to promotewhat small business Saturday is all about in my ownconstituency. The bus tour has been right around thecountry, to Leeds, Y ork, Edinburgh, Belfast, Manchester,Nottingham, Norwich, Birmingham, Cardiff, Bristol,Plymouth, Lambeth and Camden, as well as to Chesterfield,and has been well saluted. Anyone who has been on itand had the opportunity to see people’s response willhave a sense of how strongly people in our communitiesfeel about how important small businesses are, a feelingthat has been reflected in the debate.Small business Saturday in 2013 was a massive success.
It drove hundreds of millions of pounds of extra tradeto British small businesses and 48% of UK consumerswere aware of the day. The hon. Member for City ofChester said there were 1.5 million Facebook views andthat #SmallBizSatUK was trending in the top three onTwitter all day. Some 40% of all local authorities supportedthe campaign and hundreds of events took place acrossthe UK. It was probably the biggest celebration ofsmall businesses the UK has ever seen.
The hon. Gentleman was generous in his recognition
of the role of my hon. Friend the Member for Streatham(Mr Umunna) and the fact that this event has beentaken up right across the political sphere. It is anotherexample of what happens when everyone in Britain getstogether in support of Labour party ideas. It showswhat can be achieved, and he was generous in reflectingthat. It is right to recognise that wherever the ideastarted, the most important thing is that it is beingsupported universally. It also demonstrates what can beachieved in these straitened times without necessarilyhaving a big pot of Government money. Innovativeideas are often what matter, and campaigns that startfrom the bottom up are incredibly powerful. That wasgood.
I want to reflect on some of the contributions to this
excellent debate. The Gentleman was right to emphasisethe importance of small business Saturday. We oftenthink of it in the context of retail and shopping, but it isabout much more than that and his comments reflectedthat. If anyone thought of small business Saturdaypurely in the context of retail, the fact that a funeraldirector won the award in his constituency may haveremoved that misapprehension. The hon. Gentlemanmade a great speech and I was pleased to hear it and totake up some of the challenges he offered.
The hon. Gentlemanlisted measures that he thought
were positive and then said he did not want a partypolitical debate. He might have hoped for a little toomuch there, but his point about business rates is incrediblyimportant. He asked me whether the Labour partysupports the Government’s aims for the review of businessrates. I am not entirely clear what those aims are, butthe fact there will be a review is positive. Increasingly inthe last few years, the level of business rates has beenseen as punitive. We have the highest level of corporateproperty tax in the G20, corresponding with the lowestlevel of corporation tax in the G7. We have said wewant to maintain the lowest level of corporation tax,but a focus on constantly reducing profit tax and havingever spiralling corporate property tax encourages aneconomy in which businesses bring their books to theUK, but do not bring their jobs and manufacturing or apresence on the high street. I totally support a review ofbusiness rates, but whether I support what the Governmentwant that review to find, I am thus far unable toenlighten the hon. Gentleman, because I am not entirelyclear what their aims are. I certainly welcome the factthat there will be a significant debate.
My hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow North East
(Mr Bain) made a wide-ranging speech focusing on theimportance of a small business administration at theheart of Government. He will be pleased to know that afuture Labour Government will want to introduce that,in recognition of the need for Departments throughoutWhitehall to work together to support businesses,215WH 216WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturdayparticularly small businesses. He also focused on
procurement, which is an area where the Governmentcould do much more to support small businesses. Thatpoint was echoed by other hon. Members.
My hon. Friend also spoke about the universal
broadband commitment. In my time in my present role,I have been to 45 areas of the country doing smallbusiness consultations, and at almost every one broadbandaccess was raised. A few days ago, at a lunch with theRural Shops Alliance focused on the needs of ruralbusinesses, the alliance spoke strongly about the importanceof a more universal offer on broadband.
The hon. Member for High Peak (Andrew Bingham)
reflected on the many different roles that a small businessowner has. I tried to combine those with being aparliamentary candidate so I know how difficult it is.
Andrew Bingham indicated assent.
Toby Perkins: The hon. Gentleman is indicating that
he did the same. It was no easy task. In what hedescribed as an evangelical contribution, he highlightedthe importance of support for business owners, whooften have brilliant business ideas but do not instantlyhave the different knowledge bases needed. The Governmentshould take some responsibility for supporting access toskills development, so that small businesses are not shutout of Government contracts because they cannot findtheir way through complicated procurement processes.We must ensure they have access to apprenticeships andGovernment schemes such as funding for lending. Thereare pieces of knowledge that are found in big businesses,but not when someone starts a small business. Providingsuch support for small businesses is incredibly important.
The hon. Gentleman argued that we should make
every day a small business day, and won support fromother hon. Members. That was an interesting idea. Heand I are former small business owners, and all smallbusiness owners I speak to do not want special favoursor expect people to shop with them as a favour. All theywant is a fair chance for people to consider what theyhave to offer and whether it is worth buying from them,taking a step off the beaten track and looking downsome of the small arcades where many of those businessesare located.
Small business Saturday is not about saying that big
businesses are bad, or suggesting that we do not need tosupport all our retailers. We are not in any way demeaningthe contribution that big businesses make. What it saysis that on one day every year, let us all take a bit of extratime to look at the hidden gems on our high streets orjust off them. When we have visited them and perhapsspent money with them, we may return to them naturallybecause we found things that we did not know were outthere. To my mind, that is what small business Saturdayis all about.
Andrew Bingham: The hon. Gentleman is right. Our
business did not want or expect special favours; we justwanted a fair chance to ask people to look at theproduct, to look at the price and to give us a fair crackof the whip. We just wanted an even playing field and afair chance to compete with the big boys.
Toby Perkins: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman
for saying that because it fits in with something I willsay in a few moments about the Government’s role ofensuring that all businesses in a free market get a fair
chance. His contribution was powerful in several waysand I look forward to returning to it.
My hon. Friend the Member for Middlesbrough
(Andy McDonald) reflected on the fact that small businessowners often work incredibly long hours to keep thewheels of commerce turning, and he was right to pointthat out. He also said that they are often the last to bepaid, both personally in terms of taking money out ofthe business, and often because they are way down thelist of supplier payments. As he knows, the Labourparty feels passionate about that, and there is a role forthe Government to ensure that we do more to eradicatethe scourge of late payment to small businesses.
The sense of excitement and anticipation my hon.
Friend feels as he looks forward to small businessSaturday positively crackled out of every word of hiscontribution. He demonstrated his wide-ranging—almostencyclopaedic—knowledge of the small businesses inMiddlesbrough, and he particularly promoted the fabulousfashions available there. He did not let us know whetherhe was dressed in one of the latest of those fashions, butI suspect that he and my hon. Friend the Member forMiddlesbrough South and East Cleveland (TomBlenkinsop), who was here a moment ago, are examplesof just some of the fashions available on the Middlesbroughhigh street, and what fine examples they are too.
The hon. Member for Cheadle (Mark Hunter) paid
tribute to the businesses that go the extra mile. He madean incredibly important point about the contributionbusinesses often make to the vibrancy of the high streetand the community by supporting initiatives, eitherwith local authorities or as part of the business community,and business improvement districts have been importantcontributors in that respect. It is important that everyonegets together to make sure our high street has a vibrantoffer.
Many hon. Members reflected on the progress that
has been made on woman entrepreneurs and on theirimportance, and that is an incredibly important issue.One of the key challenges the country continues to faceis how to develop women’s entrepreneurial potentialfurther, particularly after they have had children. Wecontinue to do less well than we could, because of theimpact of child care costs and the fact that we are atime-poor society in many ways. Broadband is important,because women entrepreneurs often want to run businessesfrom home. There are therefore a huge number ofchallenges the Government should look to take up, andit is great that Members have reflected on the importanceof the issue.
Maria Miller: The hon. Gentleman has reflected on
the importance of child care, particularly for womenentrepreneurs. I therefore hope that he will welcome thetax break that the Government have, for the first time,given the self-employed in relation to child care. Surelythat is an important step in the right direction, and Ihope that he will support it.
Toby Perkins: I absolutely do. The right hon. Lady
may be aware that the proposal first featured in Labour’ssmall business taskforce report, and we are pleased thatthe Government have brought it forward. Whoever’sidea it is, the fact that good ideas are followed up ispositive.217WH 218WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturday[Toby Perkins]
The right hon. Lady is right to focus on child care.
She and many other people across the House will lookforward to the day when child care is not seen as just awomen’s issue, but it remains one of the barriers thatwomen entrepreneurs face. I am therefore pleased thatthe Labour party has made a commitment to increasethe level of free child care to 25 hours a week. We haveseen some positive steps under this Government,notwithstanding our concerns about the increase incosts in the sector. However, I entirely agree with theright hon. Lady.
I also enjoyed the right hon. Lady’s earlier contribution,
in which she paid tribute to the Federation of SmallBusinesses. She also gave us an evocative historical tourof her constituency. She was right to say that smallbusinesses are an important part of the history of ourtown centres, and we want them to be a part of theirfutures as well. That is what this debate and smallbusiness Saturday are all about.
My hon. Friend the Member for Feltham and Heston
(Seema Malhotra) spoke about the extent to whichsmall businesses can make an impression on the national,as well as the local, stage. She also mentioned theimportance of the relationship between our public servicesand local authorities and our small businesses.
One thing that has come across in the debate is how
widespread support is on this issue. My hon. Friend theMember for Middlesbrough spoke about some of thework he has done in his constituency. I did a littleresearch before the debate to find out what happenedlast year, and I was amazed by the different contributionspeople told me they had made. My hon. Friend theMember for Bury South (Mr Lewis) wrote to localsmall businesses and to business groups such as thelocal chamber of commerce to encourage them toparticipate in the festivities. My hon. Friend the Memberfor Bolton West (Julie Hilling) spent the first smallbusiness Saturday on the high street in the Horwicharea of her constituency interacting with people andpromoting the small businesses there. My hon. Friendthe Member for Wakefield (Mary Creagh) did herChristmas shopping at the Wood street Christmas marketon small business Saturday, combining important familyduties with promoting the high street in a very practicalway.
My hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Wavertree
(Luciana Berger) backed local festivals, including I LoveAllerton Road and Loving Lodge Lane—there is a lotof love going on in Liverpool—to promote and supportthe small businesses that trade in those areas of herconstituency. My hon. Friend the Member for DudleyNorth (Ian Austin) publicised the free parking on offerin his constituency, to support the 100,000 people in thewider local authority area who are employed by smallbusinesses. Finally, I had the opportunity to visit 25 differentsmall businesses right across Chesterfield and Staveley—Ishould stress that I am not being competitive—and Ihave photos of me at all of them on the wall of myconstituency office.
I was also delighted to see that local authorities of all
colours have been backing small business Saturday intheir own way. Brent has a campaign called “ThinkBrent, Celebrate Local”. In Stockton, the local councilhas opened the Enterprise Arcade, with 13 new businessestesting out their retail ideas ahead of small business
Saturday. Ashfield district council is one of many localauthorities that will be supporting small business Saturdayby offering free car parking. Waltham Forest is runningits “Hidden Gems” campaign, which fits in with what Iwas talking about a moment ago. It encourages peopleto get off the beaten track slightly. The council hasshowcased a map giving independent retailers, cafésand bars an opportunity to promote themselves in theirlocal community. Derby city council is hosting an eventthat will showcase a wide variety of support for smallbusinesses and provide networking opportunities.
Community campaigners up and down the country
got in touch to talk about what they were doing. Myhon. Friend the Member for Middlesbrough reflectedon what was happening in Stockton and Louise Baldock’scontribution. In Harlow, Suzy Stride worked to promotesmall business Saturday by visiting a local “mumtrepeneurs”group promoting the message about female businessowners that we have just reflected on. Mari Williams leda small business Saturday in Whitchurch, working withthe local community and trader association, and morethan 50 businesses took part. Lynette Kelly in Leamingtonset up a business consultation event at the Lamatshardware store in Regent place on her patch. AndrewPakes in Milton Keynes worked with the local councilto provide high street information packs. CatherineAtkinson ran a “Shop Local” campaign in Ilkeston andLong Eaton. Right across the country, people fromacross the business community and the political scene,as well as community campaigners, worked together tosee what they could do on that one day to promotesmall businesses. That provides a really powerful recognitionof the importance of small businesses and small businessSaturday.
The hon. Member for City of Chester spoke about
wanting to be positive, and that is absolutely right. Weneed to say what we in this place can positively do, andwe need to think about what the small business communitymight ask of us in relation to small business Saturday.However, we should also make sure that supportingsmall businesses is something we do not just for Christmas,but every day of the year.
There are a number of things a future Labour
Government should aim to do. The first, which we havehad a lot of focus on in the debate, relates to businessrates. Labour has a specific proposal to reduce businessrates in its first year in government. That would be paidfor by not taking forward the final 1% of the plannedcorporation tax cut and, instead, ploughing all thatmoney into supporting the 1.5 million small firms witha rateable value under £50,000. That would be a reallysignificant step, which would reduce business rates inthe first year and freeze them in the second year. That isnot a discount approach, and there would not be anunderlying rate that is going up all the time, with adiscount being offered, as we are seeing currently; therewould actually be a real cut and then a freeze. We alsohave a proposal to freeze energy bills. Energy is one ofthe highest costs that small businesses pay, and ourproposal would save the average small business £1,800.
The banking system was mentioned. Small businesses
consistently say that limited access to finance is thebiggest barrier to their growth; 89% of UK small businessesare locked into the five big banks for banking facilities,and we are committed to a more competitive banking219WH 220WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturdaysystem. Hon. Members reflected on Nick Tott’s suggestion
in 2011 of a British business bank. We are delightedthat the Government’s British business bank is morphingmore into what we originally suggested, but we thinkthat we can go much further with that—in addition to ageneration of new local banks.
A primary child care guarantee would give all parents
of primary schoolchildren guaranteed access to childcare through their school, from 8 am to 6 pm—we haveheard about the need to offer more free child care tonursery age children. We recognise that that would beincredibly important to small businesses.
We are concerned that the privatisation of Royal
Mail threatens the universal service obligation. We willcampaign to ensure that, under a Labour Government,it will remain.
Late payments mean that small businesses do not get
money they are entitled to; 2,500 businesses a year gobust because they have not been paid the money theyare owed. The proposals that we have made in debateson the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Billto put the onus on customers to pay on time, ratherthan on small businesses to report them, will be takenforward in the Labour party manifesto. Those proposalshave won support from the small business community,including from the Federation of Small Businesses andthe Forum of Private Business. Working with councilsand the high street, a future Government will be able tomake a positive offer on various aspects of skills, whichwill make a real difference.
I want to repeat my congratulations to the hon.
Member for City of Chester and all those who spoke inthe debate, and I have a few questions for the Minister.First, we have heard about what action people aretaking to support small businesses, and to support andpromote small business Saturday. The fact that it is abottom-up development is valuable, but a quarter of amile from us in Victoria street there is a huge amount ofresource, and it would be interesting to know whatcontribution the Government have made to supportingthe day.
The autumn statement highlighted the fact that consumer
debt is fast approaching a record level. Is the Ministerconcerned about that? Does he think it might affectfuture high street growth? He will know that the Officefor Budget Responsibility predicted in relation to theautumn statement that consumer debt will be higher inthe next two years than it was at its pre-recession peak.There is a sense that much high street growth is fuelledby consumer debt.
I am interested in what the Minister may say about
balance, in the context of giving communities a sayabout the make-up of their high street. Often a lack ofattention to planning commitment in a high street hasled to action that is good in the short term but destroysthe look of the town centre in the long term. We need tosupport town centres through transition periods. Doesthe Minister think the balance is right, at the moment,between the need for local authorities and communitiesto have a say about what happens in the high street, andthe need for planning to provide opportunities for thosewith entrepreneurial or innovative development ideas? Ihave a sense that the Government see planning as abarrier to growth; what do they propose to do insupport of getting the right balance in high streetsbetween reflecting history and not preventing reasonable,sympathetic growth?I look forward to the Minister’s responses, and I have
enjoyed winding up an incredibly constructive debate.
3.24 pm
The Minister for Business and Enterprise (Matthew
Hancock): It is a pleasure to respond to this debate
about small business Saturday, so ably and eloquentlyopened by my hon. Friend the Member for City ofChester (Stephen Mosley), who represents the city ofmy birth. He is a great ally and friend of small businessesin Chester and beyond. He talked about the difficultiesof retail space in Chester—its cost, and the accompanyingbusiness rates—and I know very well what he wastalking about, because it was the pounding ground ofmy youth. I am sure that shopkeepers, whether theirshops are old or new, will welcome the increase of smallbusiness rate relief for retail outlets to £1,500, whichwas announced yesterday. I hope it will allow them toput the small business Saturday card in their windows,and participate in the day, with even more enthusiasm.
The debate has been positive and cross-party, and
small business Saturday has strong cross-party support.I want to answer the first of the questions put to me bythe hon. Member for Chesterfield (Toby Perkins)—Ialmost called him my hon. Friend; we spend so muchtime together these days that it is almost coming tothat—about what the Government are doing to promotesmall business Saturday. We are putting a huge amountof effort into doing that, but crucially it is a bottom-up,small business-led campaign.
The idea came, of course, from the United States of
America, and when we were approached to build it upin the UK we were very keen. However, we are also keenthat the Government should not take the lead. Iacknowledge the work done by the Opposition FrontBenchers to ensure that the enterprise is truly cross-party.Therefore, although the Government have put effort in,we have chosen not to take a lead. It is far better forsmall business Saturday to be led by the hundreds ofthousands, and hopefully in due course millions, ofsmall businesses that participate.
Toby Perkins: I agree entirely with the Minister; but
he does not usually hide his light under a bushel, so canhe be a little more specific? He said that the Governmenthave put in a huge amount of effort, so what specificallyhave they done?
Matthew Hancock: Most of the support has been on
the communications front, through the brilliant MichelleOvens, to whom I pay tribute for leading the privateorganisation for small business Saturday. Thecommunications effort last year included hosting thesmall business Saturday bus in Downing street andensuring that the Government communication machinecame in behind small business Saturday. This year wewill hold a street market in Downing street, and we haveinvited 100 of the most exciting small businesses in thecountry. The street stalls are already being constructedin Downing street, to make it an exciting part of theday. The market will run from tomorrow, in advance ofand into small business Saturday. We will have Ministersfrom the Prime Minister down fanning out across thecountry to celebrate the day, and I am sure that even theBusiness Secretary will get involved.221WH 222WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturday[Matthew Hancock]
What we have done has mainly been on the
communications side; but to that must be added the policychanges we have made. The Government are incrediblyenthusiastic about small business. Of course, a stableand growing economy is the No. 1 thing that can helpsmall business. My hon. Friend the Member for HighPeak (Andrew Bingham) talked about the problems oflate payment, and the effect of a big customer goingbust or going into liquidation. That happened to myfamily business when I was growing up. It is a verypainful memory, because we were days away from goingbust, which would have had serious consequences notonly for the 20 or so people we employed, for whom wefelt a responsibility, but for my mother and stepfather,who worked in the business. I thought my hon. Friendput it incredibly powerfully. Of course, not only is HighPeak one of the most beautiful parts of the country, butit has had 2,600 start-ups since 2010, when he becamethe local representative.
The stable macro-economy makes an important
contribution to small businesses. On tax, the hon. Memberfor Chesterfield said that it was not important to reducetaxes on profits. I know it is his party’s policy to opposethat reduction, and I do not want to get too much intothat, but the point is that reducing corporation taxsends out a signal that we support and celebrate businessesof all sizes and allows businesses to be attracted to theUK. At the same time, we have to tackle business rates,and we propose to do so with a review, which will reportafter the election. Business rates raise over £20 billion,so they make a significant fiscal contribution, but thecomplaints I receive are mostly about their design; theybecome an overhead, rather than being related to theamount of turnover or profit. They are a higher-risk taxthan either corporation tax on profits or taxes on thepay of employees, such as national insurance.
Toby Perkins: The Minister will be glad to know that
my right hon. Friend the Member for Morley andOutwood (Ed Balls) has declared that we will continueto have the lowest corporation tax in the G8. On businessrates, when Government set out on a review, they usuallyhave an idea of what they want to find at the end ofthat. We accept that a lot of evidence will come inbefore the report’s final make-up becomes clear, but willthe Minister give us an idea of what the Governmentsee the end point looking like?
Matthew Hancock: We announced the review yesterday,
so the hon. Gentleman will not be surprised to hear thatI do not have its conclusions today. However, we can seethe direction of travel. We have reduced the impact ofbusiness rates on retail outlets and capped the increasein business rates. We have also extended the discountthrough small business rate relief, which, when theprevious Government left office, was about to close. Wehave continually extended that—we have done so for afurther year from 1 April this year, so we can see thedirection of travel.
We will want to get the details right, so we are very
keen to hear about how we do that from small businesses,their representative bodies and others with an interest.However, I take the point, made by my hon. Friend theMember for High Peak, that small business people donot have the time to go and lobby their MPs because
they are too busy running their businesses. He is absolutelyright about that.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Basingstoke
(Maria Miller) made a powerful speech about smallbusinesses in Basingstoke. Let me answer her questionsspecifically. Am I satisfied with connectivity for smallbusinesses? No, I am not. We are rolling out broadbandand increasingly the country is being covered by superfastbroadband. The roll-out of 4G has helped with connectivity,but none of these things is complete. I have visited acentre that conducts research into 5G, which is anexciting technology, but the most exciting thing aboutit is that the research began even before the roll-out of4G started, which is a sign that we have our eyes on thefuture. There is a lot of work to do to get all that right.Places in the world such as South Korea are absolutelymiles ahead of us on this issue, and we need to keeppushing hard.
My right hon. Friend asked about women in work
and promoting female entrepreneurs, and she and Ihave worked on that in the past. A record number ofwomen are in work, and I am also glad that the genderpay gap has come down to a record low. The detailsshow that for those under the age of 40, the gender paygap has all but been eliminated. I would like to see iteliminated altogether, but that is a big, positive change.
Undoubtedly, the most important things for female
entrepreneurs are exactly the same things that help maleentrepreneurs—making it easier to employ people, makingit easier to start a business and having a stable macro-economy—but there are specific things that can particularlyhelp. My right hon. Friend spoke about the challengesof running a small business while supporting a family,and in many cases being the primary support for afamily. I know about that very well—not as a mother,but as a son—because my mother ran our family’s smallbusiness. I remember very well sitting on her knee as achild while she worked on the finances of the business.She truly was juggling things, almost literally. We havetried across this Parliament to push the extension ofsupport for child care, and I know that Members onboth sides support that.
My right hon. Friend asked specifically about social
enterprise. The things that make it easy to run anenterprise that is primarily for profit are the sorts ofthings that can help expand a social enterprise, but wecan do—and have done—more specific things to supportsocial enterprise. That, again, is a cross-Governmentpiece of work, because work comes out of all thedifferent Departments to make it easier to grow socialenterprises. I am glad to see that the number of socialenterprises is rising as well as the number of smallbusinesses.
The hon. Member for Feltham and Heston (Seema
Malhotra) also discussed women in business. She talkedabout local heroes, some of whom I had not even heardof, so I was very glad to hear about those. She spokespecifically about linking enterprise to schools—that isa big agenda that she may hear more about in comingweeks—and particularly about ensuring that schoolspromote enterprise and business as an exciting andviable future. We have tried to get more people from allsorts of walks of life, including from business, intoschools directly to interact with pupils. In fact, we haveput a duty on schools to open up to external employers,223WH 224WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business Saturdaybusiness people and others, in order to lift horizons and
engage more with students. I know that there is more todo on that agenda.
The next steps we need to take are these: we need to
make sure that we continue the drive so that whereregulation is necessary, it is easier to navigate, and weneed to deregulate where possible. We have saved businessesover £1.5 billion in annual costs. We have scrapped orimproved 84% of health and safety regulations; thousandsof small businesses have been removed from proactivehealth and safety inspections, for example.
We also have to do more on exports, which were
mentioned by the hon. Member for Glasgow NorthEast (Mr Bain). When our major trading partners arestruggling and, in some cases, in recession, exports aremore difficult, but many small businesses get into exportseither by accident or because they have found a particularniche. Many small businesses increasingly find that ifthey start a website with their product on it, they end upfulfilling an order somewhere else around the world,and that is how they get into exporting. However, fewerthan half of businesses have websites through whichthey can trade—that is, websites on which money changeshands. That point is linked to the one about expandingconnectivity, because being able to trade through awebsite is important.
We are also simplifying and streamlining how businesses
access our support services. The website greatbusiness.gov.ukis a single place where businesses can now go for all supportfrom Government and others. We heard the reportsfrom small businesses that the offer of support fromGovernment was often confused and in lots of differentpots, so we have brought it all together in one place.
Several hon. Members mentioned the business bank
and the need for such a bank. That is absolutely right,so I am delighted that on 1 November the Britishbusiness bank was given independent status and is nowfully functioning. Yesterday, in the autumn statement, itgot £400 million of extra support. I am excited aboutthe potential of the business bank. I have already seen itin action—I have visited some of the schemes that itsupports—and it is undoubtedly helping with access tofinance. However, the biggest thing that we can do tosupport access to finance is to get the banking system asa whole on an even keel and supporting small businesses.I welcome news of moves in that direction by some ofthe big banks. There is undoubtedly more local engagement,but this is a long journey after a long journey in thewrong direction in the previous decade or more.
There are 760,000 more small businesses now than
there were in 2010. There is a record number of smallbusinesses in the UK—5.2 million. These are the vastmajority of businesses in the UK—we could call themthe 99%. Conservative Members support themwholeheartedly. There is support across the House forsmall business Saturday and the work that its promotersare doing to make it a first-rate success. I know that40% of local authorities were involved in small businessSaturday last year. For the first year of an enterprise,that was pretty impressive, but we want to do better andwe want small business Saturday to grow and grow.
In my hon. Friend the Member for City of Chester,
small businesses have someone who is passionate in hissupport of them. There are few who would be a betterchampion of them; there are few whom it would bebetter to have on their side. I pay tribute to him and thework that he has done, not only as the Prime Minister’s
small business ambassador for the north-west of Englandbut nationally, through this debate and many otheractivities, to ensure that people know about small businessSaturday this Saturday. I hope that people will shopsmall, shop local and support small businesses on Saturdayand throughout the rest of the year.
3.42 pm
Stephen Mosley: I thank the Minister for his kind
words, but it is not just me in this Chamber who hasexperience of small business. Almost every hon. Memberwho spoke has such experience, whether they werebrought up in a small business or have set up their ownbusiness, and anyone who has been involved in a smallbusiness knows how difficult that can be. There can bevery good times, but there can also be difficult times. Aswe heard from my hon. Friend the Member for HighPeak (Andrew Bingham), the person running a smallbusiness has to be the salesman, the accountant, thecredit controller and the marketeer; they have to do allthose jobs. I remember that when I was setting up myown small business, I had trouble sleeping at night whenI realised that I had £6,000 of expenditure a month topay out and no visible means of raising the money. Forme, it worked out, but it can be very difficult. The moresupport that small business gets, the better.
There were some fantastic speeches today. The two
that I will concentrate on are those by the hon. Membersfor Middlesbrough (Andy McDonald) and for Felthamand Heston (Seema Malhotra), because too many timesduring this Parliament I have been sitting on theGovernment Benches and have heard Opposition Memberspaint a rather bleak picture of their constituencies. As abusiness man, as someone who would want to invest, Iwould think, “Why would I invest in a community thatis portrayed as bleak?” Neither hon. Member did that.They both portrayed their constituencies as vibrant andhappening, and they talked about the huge successes inthose communities. I listened to them and thought,“Those are the sort of places where I would want to go;they’re the sort of places where I would want to shop;they’re the sort of places where I would want to investand set up a business.” As Members, we all have theresponsibility of championing our own constituencies,of encouraging investment and of supporting the businessesin our communities, and those two hon. Members inparticular did an absolutely fantastic job today.
The single most important thing that came out of the
debate was that vibrant communities need vibrant smallbusinesses. By backing and supporting small business,we can create successful communities. If we take onething from small business Saturday, it should be that weall have a role to play in securing the future of smallbusiness. By encouraging our constituents, our localcouncils and business organisations and others to getbehind small business and small business Saturday, wecan increase turnover in our local shops, increase thenumber of shops in our local communities and improveour communities. Small business Saturday was a hugesuccess last year, and I hope that it will be an even largersuccess this year.
Question put and agreed to.
3.46 pm
Sitting adjourned.225WH 226WH
4 DECEMBER 2014 Small Business Saturday Small Business SaturdayWritten Statement
Thursday 4 December 2014
CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
Telecommunications Council
The Minister for Culture and the Digital Economy
(Mr Edward Vaizey): The Telecommunications Council
took place in Brussels on 27 November 2014. TheDeputy Permanent Representative to the EU, ShanMorgan, represented the UK. It is worth noting that theagenda was taken in a different order as reported in thepre-Council statement and this is reflected in this statement.
The first item was a proposal for a directive of
the European Parliament and of the Council on theaccessibility to public sector bodies’ websites. (Firstreading EM 16006/11). There were no major interventionson this item.
The second item was a report on the state of play
from the presidency on the proposal for a regulation ofthe European Parliament and of the Council layingdown measures concerning the European single marketfor electronic communications and to achieve a connectedcontinent. (First reading EM 13562/13 and 13555/13 +ADDs 1-2). This item began with a “state of play” fromthe presidency. This item included a request that theCouncil should look to reach a common position toenable commencement of negotiations with the EuropeanParliament at the earliest opportunity.
The UK, Germany, Spain, Romania, Portugal, Malta,
Poland and France endorsed this proposed approach.However, the majority of the remaining member statesopposed this idea. Many member states also suggested
that further work was needed on roaming, includingimpact assessments, consultations and advice fromthe Body of European Regulators for ElectronicCommunications (BEREC). With regard to the netneutrality proposal, member states generally supportedthe presidency’s proposal for a principles based approach.The UK intervention was as per the pre-Council statement.
The presidency concluded this item by noting that
Council remained divided on this package, but wouldstrive to work towards reaching a common position.The new Commissioner for the Digital Economy andSociety, Günther Oettinger, intervened stating that theCommission would continue to push this package atpolitical and technical level, to enable the completion ofthe negotiations.
There then followed information from the presidency
on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliamentand of the Council concerning measures to ensure ahigh level of network and information security acrossthe Union (First reading EM6342/13). There were nomajor interventions on this item.
There then followed the adoption of draft Council
conclusions on internet governance. They were adoptedwith little comment from most member states.
The final major item was a “full table” debate on the
mid-term review of the Commission’s EU 2020 strategy.The ensuing debate was focused on the digital agenda.Highlights included: many member states linked progresson the digital agenda with the need to encourage jobsand growth within the EU; some signalled commitmentto the digital single market; and a number of othershighlighted the importance of broadband roll-out. TheUK intervention was as per the pre-Council statement.
Finally, the Latvian delegation informed the Council
of their priorities for their forthcoming presidency beforeCouncil adjourned until the next meeting in summer 2015.17WS 18WS
4 DECEMBER 2014 Written Statements Written StatementsORAL ANSWERS
Thursday 4 December 2014
Col. No.
HOUSE OF COMMONS COMMISSION .............. 419
Commission on Digital Democracy ....................... 419
LEADER OF THE HOUSE ..................................... 420
Ministerial Announcements (Guidance) ................ 420Smith Commission................................................. 424Written Answers..................................................... 421Y outh Parliament................................................... 423
TRANSPORT ........................................................... 405
Congestion............................................................. 406Col. No.
TRANSPORT— continued
Congestion............................................................. 411East Coast Main Line ............................................ 408FirstGroup (Great Western Main Line) ................. 415HS2 Skills Academy............................................... 411Network Rail (Control Period 5 Investment) ......... 409Port Regulation...................................................... 415Rail North Electrification Taskforce ...................... 413Tag Systems ........................................................... 405Topical Questions .................................................. 416
WRITTEN STATEMENT
Thursday 4 December 2014
Col. No.
CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT .......................... 17WS
Telecommunications Council ................................. 17WSMembers who wish to have the Daily Report of the Debates forwarded to them should give notice at the Vote
Office.
No proofs of the Daily Reports can be supplied. Corrections which Members suggest for the Bound Volume
should be clearly marked in the Daily Report, but not telephoned, and the copy containing the Corrections must
be received at the Editor’s Room, House of Commons,
not later than
Thursday 11 December 2014
STRICT ADHERENCE TO THIS ARRANGEMENT GREATLY FACILITATES THE
PROMPT PUBLICATION OF THE VOLUMES
Members may obtain excerpts of their Speeches from the Official Report (within one month from the date of
publication), on application to the Stationery Office, c/o the Editor of the Official Report, House ofCommons, from whom the terms and conditions of reprinting may be ascertained. Application forms areavailable at the Vote Office.
PRICES AND SUBSCRIPTION RATES
DAIL Y PARTS
Single copies:
Commons, £5; Lords, £4.
Annual subscriptions:
Commons, £865; Lords, £600.
LORDS VOLUME INDEX obtainable on standing order only. Details available on request.BOUND VOLUMES OF DEBATES are issued periodically during the session.
Single copies:
Commons, £105; Lords, £60 (£100 for a two-volume edition).Standing orders will be accepted.
THE INDEX to each Bound Volume of House of Commons Debates is published separately at £9·00 and can be supplied to standing
order.
All prices are inclusive of postageVolume 589 Thursday
No. 74 4 December 2014
CONTENTS
Thursday 4 December 2014
Oral Answers to Questions [Col. 405] [see index inside back page]
Secretary of State for TransportLeader of the HouseHouse of Commons Commission
Business of the House [Col. 427]
Statement—(Mr Hague)
Pensions and Benefits Uprating [Col. 443]
Statement—(Steve Webb)
Stamp Duty Land Tax [Col. 450]
Motion—(Steve Webb)—agreed to
Backbench Business
Financial Conduct Authority Redress Scheme [Col. 477]
Motion—(Guto Bebb)—agreed to
Branded Medicines (NHS) [Col. 525]
Motion—(Mr Lansley)—lapsed
Antisocial Behaviour (South Manchester) [Col. 536]
Debate on motion for Adjournment
Westminster Hall
Small Business Saturday [Col. 193WH]Debate on motion for Adjournment
Written Statement [Col. 17WS]
Written Answers to Questions [The written answers can now be found at http://www.parliament.uk/writtenanswers]